SS-1
Avoid development of inappropriate sites and reduce the environmental impact from the location of a building on a site.
Do not develop buildings on portions of sites that meet any one of the following criteria:
-Prime farmland as defined by the American Farmland Trust
-Land whose elevation is lower than 5 feet above the elevation of the 100-year flood as defined by FEMA
-Land which provides habitat for any species on the Federal or State threatened or endangered list
-Within 100 feet of any wetland as defined by 40 CFR, Parts 230-233 and Part 22, OR as defined by local or state rule or law, whichever is more stringent
-Land which prior to acquisition for the project was public
parkland, unless land of equal or greater value as parkland is
accepted in trade by the public landowner (Park Authority
projects are exempt)
During the site selection process, give preference to those sites that do not include
sensitive site elements and restricted land types. Select a suitable building location and
design the building with the minimal footprint to minimize site disruption. Strategies
include stacking the building program, tuck under parking, and sharing facilities with
neighbors.

SS-2
Channel development to urban areas with existing infrastructures, protecting greenfields
and preserving habitat and natural resources.
Increase localized density to conform to existing or desired
density goals by utilizing sites that are located within an existing
minimum development density of 60,000 square feet per
acre (2 story downtown development)
During the site selection process, give preference to urban sites with high development
densities. Quantify the development density of the project as well as the surrounding
area.

SS-3
Rehabilitate damaged sites where development is complicated by real or perceived
environmental contamination, reducing pressure on undeveloped land.
Develop on a site classified as a Brownfield and provide
remediation as required by EPA’s Sustainable Redevelopment
of Brownfields Program requirements
During the site selection process, give preference to brownfield sites. Identify tax
incentives and property cost savings by selecting a brownfield site. Adopt a site
remediation plan and cleanup the site using remediation strategies such as pump-andtreat,
bioreactors, land farming, and in-situ remediation.

SS-4
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
Locate building within ½ mile of a commuter rail, light rail or
subway station or ¼ mile of 2 or more bus lines
Provide suitable means for securing bicycles, with convenient
changing/shower facilities for use by cyclists, for 5% or more
of building occupants
Install alternative-fuel refueling station(s) for 3% of the total
vehicle parking capacity of the site. Liquid or gaseous fueling
facilities must be separately ventilated or located outdoors
Size parking capacity not to exceed minimum local zoning
requirements AND provide preferred parking for carpools
or van pools capable of serving 5% of the building occupants,
OR, add no new parking for rehabilitation projects AND
provide preferred parking for carpools or van pools capable
of serving 5% of the building occupants.
Perform a transportation survey of future building occupants to identify transportation
needs. Site the building near mass transit and design the building with transportation
amenities such as bicycle racks and showering/changing facilities, alternative fuel
refueling stations, and carpool/ van pool programs. Also consider sharing transportation
facilities such as parking lots and refueling stations with neighbors.

SS-5
Conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat and
promote biodiversity.
On greenfield sites, limit site disturbance including earthwork
and clearing of vegetation to 40 feet beyond the building perimeter,
5 feet beyond primary roadway curbs, walkways, and
main utility branch trenches, and 25 feet beyond pervious paving
areas that require additional staging areas in order to limit
compaction in the paved area; OR, on previously developed
sites, restore a minimum of 50% of the remaining open area
by planting native or adapted vegetation.
Reduce the development footprint (including building, access
roads and parking) to exceed the local zoning’s open space
requirement for the site by 25%.
Perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for development
of the project site. Select a suitable building location and design the building
with the minimal footprint to minimize site disruption. Strategies include stacking the
building program, tuck under parking, and sharing facilities with neighbors. Establish
clearly marked construction boundaries to minimize disturbance of existing site and
restore previously degraded areas to their natural state.

SS-6
Limit disruption of natural water flows by minimizing stormwater runoff, increasing
on-site infiltration and reducing contaminants.
Implement a stormwater management plan that results in:
No net increase in the rate and quantity of stormwater runoff
from existing to developed conditions; OR, if existing
imperviousness is greater than 50%, implement a stormwater
management plan that results in a 25% decrease in the rate and
quantity of stormwater runoff.
Treatment systems designed to remove 80% of the average
annual post development total suspended solids (TSS), and
40% of the average annual post development total phosphorous
(TP), by implementing Best Management Practices (BMPs)
outlined in EPA’s Guidance Specifying Management Measures
for Sources of Non-point Pollution in Coastal Waters (EPA
840-B-92-002 1/93).
Design the project site to maintain natural stormwater flows by promoting infiltration.
Specify garden roofs and pervious paving to minimize impervious surfaces.
Reuse stormwater volumes generated for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation,
toilet and urinal flushing, and custodial uses. Install mechanical or natural treatment
systems such as constructed wetlands, vegetated filter strips, and bioswales to
treat stormwater volumes leaving the site.

SS-7
Reduce heat islands (thermal gradient differences between developed and undeveloped
areas) to minimize impact on microclimate and human and wildlife habitat.
Provide shade (within 5 years) on at least 30% of non-roof
impervious surface on the site, including parking lots, walkways,
plazas, etc., OR, use light-colored/high-albedo materials
(reflectance of at least 0.3) for 30% of the site’s non-roof
impervious surfaces, OR place a minimum of 50% of parking
space underground OR use open-grid pavement system
(net impervious area of LESS than 50%) for a minimum of
50% of the parking lot area.
Use ENERGY STAR Roof-compliant, high-reflectance AND
high emissivity roofing (initial reflectance of at least 0.65 and
three-year-aged reflectance of at least 0.5 when tested in accordance
with ASTM E903 and emissivity of at least 0.9
when tested in accordance with ASTM 408) for a minimum
of 75% of the roof surface; OR, install a “green” (vegetated)
roof for at least 50% of the roof area.
Shade constructed surfaces on the site with landscape features and minimize the overall
building footprint. Consider replacing constructed surfaces (i.e., roof, roads, sidewalks,
etc.) with vegetated surfaces such as garden roofs and open grid paving or
specify light-colored, high-albedo materials to reduce the heat absorption.

SS-8
Eliminate light trespass from the building site, improve night sky access, and reduce
development impact on nocturnal environments.
Do not exceed Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA) footcandle level requirements as stated in
the Recommended Practice Manual: Lighting for Exterior Environments,
AND design interior and exterior lighting such
that zero direct-beam illumination leaves the building site.
Adopt site lighting criteria to maintain safe light levels while avoiding off-site lighting
and night sky pollution. Minimize site lighting where possible and model the site
lighting using a computer model. Technologies to reduce light pollution include full
cutoff luminaries, low-reflectance surfaces, and low-angle spotlights.

WE-1
Limit or eliminate the use of potable water for landscape irrigation.
Use high efficiency irrigation technology, OR, use captured
rain or recycled site water, to reduce potable water consumption
for irrigation by 50% over conventional means.
Use only captured rain or recycled site water for an additional
50% reduction (100% total reduction) of potable water for
site irrigation needs, OR, do not install permanent landscape
irrigation systems.
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate landscape types and design
the landscape with indigenous plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation requirements.
Use high efficiency irrigation systems and consider reuse of stormwater or graywater
volumes for irrigation.

WE-2
Reduce the generation of wastewater and potable water demand, while increasing the
local aquifer recharge.
Reduce the use of municipally provided potable water for
building sewage conveyance by a minimum of 50%, OR, treat
100% of wastewater on site to tertiary standards.
Estimate the wastewater volumes generated in the building and specify high efficiency
fixtures and dry fixtures such as composting toilets and waterless urinals to reduce
these volumes. Consider reusing stormwater or graywater for sewage conveyance or
on-site wastewater treatment systems (mechanical or natural).

WE-3
Maximize water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal water
supply and wastewater systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use 20% less water than
the water use baseline calculated for the building (not including
irrigation) after meeting Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture
performance requirements.
Exceed the potable water use reduction by an additional 10%
(30% total efficiency increase).
Estimate the potable and non-potable water needs for the building. Use high efficiency
fixtures, dry fixtures such as composting toilets and waterless urinals, and occupant
sensors to reduce the potable water demand. Consider reuse of stormwater
and graywater for non-potable applications such as toilet and urinal flushing, mechanical
systems, and custodial uses.

EA-1
Achieve increasing levels of energy performance above the prerequisite standard to
reduce environmental impacts associated with excessive energy use.
Reduce design energy cost compared to the energy cost budget for regulated energy
components described in the requirements of ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-1999,
as demonstrated by a whole building simulation using the Energy Cost Budget Method
described in Section 11:
New Buildings Existing Buildings Points
20% 10% 2
30% 20% 4
40% 30% 6
50% 40% 8
60% 50% 10
Regulated energy components include HVAC systems, building envelope, service hot
water systems, lighting and other regulated systems as defined by ASHRAE.
Reduce design energy cost by 20% / 10%.
Reduce design energy cost by 30% / 20%.
Reduce design energy cost by 40% / 30%.
Reduce design energy cost by 50% / 40%.
Reduce design energy cost by 60% / 50%.
Design the building envelope and building systems to maximize energy performance.
Use a computer simulation model to assess the energy performance and identify the
most cost effective energy efficie

EA-2
Encourage and recognize increasing levels of self-supply through renewable technologies
to reduce environmental impacts associated with fossil fuel energy use.
Supply a net fraction of the building’s total energy use (as expressed as a fraction of
annual energy cost) through the use of on-site renewable energy systems.
% Total Energy Load Cost in Renewables Points
5% 1
10% 2
20% 3
Renewable energy, 5% contribution
Renewable energy, 10% contribution
Renewable energy, 20% contribution
Assess the project for renewable energy potential including solar, wind, geothermal,
biomass, hydro, and bio-gas strategies. When applying these strategies, take advantage
of net metering with the local utility.

EA-3
Verify and ensure that the entire building is designed, constructed, and calibrated to
operate as intended.
In addition to the Fundamental Building Commissioning prerequisite,
implement the following additional commissioning
tasks:
1. Conduct a focused review of the design prior to the construction
documents phase.
2. Conduct a focused review of the Construction Documents
when close to completion.
3. Conduct a selective review of contractor submittals of
commissioned equipment. (The above three reviews must be
performed by a firm other than the designer.)
4. Develop a recommissioning management manual.
5. Have a contract in place for a near-warranty end or post
occupancy review.
Engage the Commissioning Authority early in project design phases. Task the commissioning
agent to conduct project reviews before and after construction documents
are complete. The Commissioning Agent must also create a recommissioning manual
for the building and review the project at near-warranty end.

EA-4
Reduce ozone depletion and support early compliance with the Montreal Protocol.
Install base building level HVAC and refrigeration equipment
and fire suppression systems that do not contain HCFC’s or
Halon.
When reusing buildings, inventory existing building systems using refrigerants and fire
suppression chemicals and replace those that contain HCFCs or halons. For new
buildings, specify refrigeration and fire suppression systems that use no HCFCs or
halons.

EA-5
Provide for the ongoing accountability and optimization of building energy and water
consumption performance over time.
Comply with the long term continuous measurement of performance
as stated in Option B: Methods by Technology of
the US DOE’s International Performance Measurement and
Verification Protocol (IPMVP) for the following:
-Lighting systems and controls
-Constant and variable motor loads
-Variable frequency drive (VFD) operation
-Chiller efficiency at variable loads (kW/ton)
-Cooling load
-Air and water economizer and heat recovery cycles
-Air distribution static pressures and ventilation air volumes
-Boiler efficiencies
-Building specific process energy efficiency systems and equipment
-Indoor water risers and outdoor irrigation systems
Model the energy and water systems to predict savings. Design the building with
equipment to measure energy and water performance. Draft a Measurement &
Verification Plan to apply during building operation that compares predicted savings
to those actually achieved in the field.

EA-6
Encourage the development and use of grid-source energy technologies on a net zero
pollution basis.
Engage in a two year contract to purchase power generated
from renewable sources that meet the Center for Resource
Solutions (CRS) Green-e products certification requirements.
Estimate the energy needs of the building and investigate opportunities to engage in a
green power contract with the local utility. Green power is derived from solar, wind,
geothermal, biomass, or low-impact hydro sources.

MR-1
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural
resources, reduce waste, and reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they
relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Reuse large portions of existing structures during renovation or redevelopment projects:
Maintain at least 75% of existing building structure and shell
(exterior skin and framing excluding window assemblies)
Maintain an additional 25% (100% total) of existing building
structure and shell (exterior skin and framing excluding window
assemblies)
Maintain 100% of existing building structure and shell AND
50% non-shell (walls, floor coverings, and ceiling systems)
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, shell, and non-shell elements.
Remove elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants and upgrade
outdated components such as windows, mechanical systems, and plumbing fixtures.
Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-2
Divert construction, demolition, and land clearing debris from landfill disposal. Redirect
recyclable material back to the manufacturing process.
Develop and implement a waste management plan, quantifying material diversion by
weight. (Remember that salvage may include the donation of materials to charitable
organizations such as Habitat for Humanity.)
Recycle and/or salvage at least 50% (by weight) of construction,
demolition, and land clearing waste
Recycle and/or salvage an additional 25% (75% total by weight)
of the construction, demolition, and land clearing debris
Establish goals for landfill diversion and adopt a construction waste management
plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling land clearing debris, cardboard, metals,
brick, concrete, plastic, clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard, carpet, and insulation.
Designate a specific area on the construction site for recycling and track recycling
efforts throughout the construction process. Identify construction haulers and recyclers
to handle the designated materials.

MR-3
Extend the life cycle of targeted building materials by reducing environmental impacts
related to materials manufacturing and transport.
Specify salvaged or refurbished materials for 5% of building
materials
Specify salvaged or refurbished materials for 10% of building
materials
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvage materials into the building design and
research potential material suppliers. Consider salvage materials such as beams and
posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry and furniture, brick, and decorative
items.

MR-4
Increase demand for building products that have incorporated recycled content materials,
therefore reducing the impacts resulting from the extraction of new materials.
Specify a minimum of 25% of building materials that contain
in aggregate, a minimum weighted average of 20% post-consumer
recycled content material, OR, a minimum weighted
average 40% post-industrial recycled content material.
Specify an additional 25% (50% total) of building materials
that contain in aggregate, a minimum weighted average of
20% post-consumer recycled content material, OR, a minimum
weighted average of 40% post-industrial recycled content
material.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials and identify materials and material
suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the specified
recycled content materials are installed and quantify the total percentage of recycled
content materials installed.

MR-5
Increase demand for building products that are manufactured locally, thereby reducing
the environmental impacts resulting from their transportation and supporting the
local economy.
Specify a minimum of 20% of building materials that are
manufactured* regionally within a radius of 500 miles.
Of these regionally manufactured materials, specify a minimum
of 50% that are extracted, harvested, or recovered within
500 miles.
* Manufacturing refers to the final assembly of components into the building
product that is furnished and installed by the tradesmen. For example, if the
hardware comes from Dallas, Texas, the lumber from Vancouver, British Columbia
and the joist is assembled in Kent, Washington; then the location of the
final assembly is Kent, Washington.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials and identify materials and material
suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the specified
local materials are installed and quantify the total percentage of local materials installed.

MR-6
Reduce the use and depletion of finite raw, and long-cycle renewable materials by
replacing them with rapidly renewable materials.
Specify rapidly renewable building materials for 5% of total
building materials.
Establish a project goal for rapidly renewable materials and identify materials and
suppliers that can achieve this goal. Consider materials such as bamboo flooring,
wool carpet, strawboard, cotton batt insulation, linoleum flooring, poplar OSB, sunflower
seed board, and wheatgrass cabinetry. During construction, ensure that the
specified rapidly renewable materials are installed and quantify the total percentage of
rapidly renewable materials installed.

MR-7
Encourage environmentally responsible forest management.
Use a minimum of 50% of wood-based materials certified in
accordance with the Forest Stewardship Council Guidelines
for wood building components including but not limited to
structural framing and general dimensional framing, flooring,
finishes, furnishings, and non-rented temporary construction
applications such as bracing, concrete form work and pedestrian
barriers.
Establish a project goal for FSC-certified wood products and identify products and
suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the FSC-certified
wood products are installed and quantify the total percentage of FSC-certified wood
products installed.

EQ-1
Provide capacity for indoor air quality (IAQ) monitoring to sustain long-term occupant
health and comfort.
Install a permanent carbon dioxide (CO2 ) monitoring system
that provides feedback on space ventilation performance in a
form that affords operational adjustments, AND specify initial
operational set point parameters that maintain indoor carbon
dioxide levels no higher than outdoor levels by more than
530 parts per million at any time.
Design the HVAC system with carbon dioxide monitoring sensors and integrate these
sensors with the building automation system (BAS).

EQ-2
Provide for the effective delivery and mixing of fresh air to support the health, safety,
and comfort of building occupants.
For mechanically ventilated buildings, design ventilation systems
that result in an air change effectiveness (E) greater than
or equal to 0.9 as determined by ASHRAE 129-1997. For
naturally ventilated spaces demonstrate a distribution and laminar
flow pattern that involves not less than 90% of the room
or zone area in the direction of air flow for at least 95% of
hours of occupancy.
Design the HVAC system and building envelope to optimize air change effectiveness.
Air change effectiveness can be optimized using a variety of ventilation strategies
including displacement ventilation, low-velocity ventilation, plug flow ventilation such
as underfloor or near-floor delivery, and operable windows. Test the air change
effectiveness of the building after construction.

EQ-3
Prevent indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction/renovation process,
to sustain long-term installer and occupant health and comfort.
Develop and implement an Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan for the construction
and preoccupancy phases of the building as follows:
During construction meet or exceed the minimum requirements
of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning National Contractors
Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guideline for Occupied
Buildings under Construction, 1995, AND protect stored
on-site or installed absorptive materials from moisture damage,
AND replace all filtration media immediately prior to
occupancy. Filtration media shall have a Minimum Efficiency
Reporting Value (MERV) of 13 as determined by ASHRAE
52.2-1999.
Conduct a minimum two-week building flush-out with new
filtration media at 100% outside air after construction ends
and prior to occupancy, OR conduct a baseline indoor air
quality testing procedure consistent with current EPA Protocol
for Environmental Requirements, Baseline IAQ and Materials,
for the Research Triangle Park Campus, Section 01445.
Technologies & Strategies
Adopt an IAQ management plan to protect the HVAC system during construction,
control pollutant sources, and interrupt pathways for contamination. Sequence installation
of materials to avoid contamination of absorptive materials such as insulation,
carpeting, ceiling tile, and gypsum wallboard. Prior to occupancy, perform a twoweek
building flushout or test the contaminant levels in the building.

EQ-4
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous or potentially irritating
to provide installer and occupant health and comfort.
Meet or exceed VOC limits for adhesives, sealants, paints, composite wood products,
and carpet systems as follows:
Adhesives must meet or exceed the VOC limits of South Coast
Air Quality Management District Rule #1168 by, AND all
sealants used as a filler must meet or exceed Bay Area Air
Quality Management District Reg. 8, Rule 51.
Paints and coatings must meet or exceed the VOC and chemical
component limits of Green Seal requirements.
Carpet systems must meet or exceed the Carpet and Rug Institute
Green Label Indoor Air Quality Test Program.
Composite wood and agrifiber products must contain no
added urea-formaldehyde resins.
Specify low-VOC materials in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits are
clearly stated in each section where adhesives, sealants, paints, coatings, carpet systems,
and composite woods are addressed.

EQ-5
Avoid exposure of building occupants to potentially hazardous chemicals that adversely
impact air quality.
Design to minimize cross-contamination of regularly occupied
occupancy areas by chemical pollutants: Employ permanent
entry way systems (grills, grates, etc.) to capture dirt, particulates,
etc. from entering the building at all high volume entry
ways, AND provide areas with structural deck to deck
partitions with separate outside exhausting, no air recirculation
and negative pressure where chemical use occurs (including
housekeeping areas and copying/print rooms), AND provide
drains plumbed for appropriate disposal of liquid waste in
spaces where water and chemical concentrate mixing occurs.
Design separate exhaust and plumbing systems for rooms with contaminants to achieve
physical isolation from the rest of the building. Install permanent architectural entryway
systems such as grills or grates to prevent occupant-borne contaminants from entering
the building.

EQ-6
Provide a high level of individual occupant control of thermal, ventilation, and lighting
systems to support optimum health, productivity, and comfort conditions.
Provide a minimum of one operable window and one lighting
control zone per 200 SF for all occupied areas within 15
feet of the perimeter wall.
Provide controls for each individual for airflow, temperature,
and lighting for 50% of the non-perimeter, regularly occupied
areas.
Design the building with occupant controls for airflow, temperature, and lighting.
Strategies to consider include task lighting, operable windows, and underfloor HVAC
systems with individual diffusers.

EQ-7
Provide for a thermally comfortable environment that supports the productive and
healthy performance of the building occupants.
Comply with ASHRAE Standard 55-1992, Addenda 1995 for
thermal comfort standards including humidity control within
established ranges per climate zone.
Install a permanent temperature and humidity monitoring system
configured to provide operators control over thermal
comfort performance and effectiveness of humidification and/
or dehumidification systems in the building.
Establish temperature and humidity comfort ranges and design the building envelope
and HVAC system to maintain these comfort ranges. Install and maintain a temperature
and humidity monitoring system in the building to automatically adjust building
conditions as appropriate.

EQ-8
Provide a connection between indoor spaces and outdoor environments through the
introduction of sunlight and views into the occupied areas of the building.
Achieve a minimum Daylight Factor of 2% (excluding all direct
sunlight penetration) in 75% of all space occupied for
critical visual tasks, not including copy rooms, storage areas,
mechanical, laundry, and other low occupancy support areas.
Exceptions include those spaces where tasks would be hindered
by the use of daylight or where accomplishing the specific
tasks within a space would be enhanced by the direct
penetration of sunlight.
Direct line of sight to vision glazing from 90% of all regularly
occupied spaces, not including copy rooms, storage areas, mechanical,
laundry, and other low occupancy support areas.
Design the building to maximize daylighting and view opportunities. Strategies to
consider include building orientation, shallow floor plates, increased building perimeter,
exterior and interior shading devices, high performance glazing, and photo-integrated
light sensors. Model daylighting strategies with a physical or computer model
to assess footcandle levels and daylight factors achieved.

ID-1
To provide design teams and projects the opportunity to be awarded points for
exceptional performance above requirements set by the LEED Green Building Rating
SystemTM and/or innovative performance in Green Building categories not specifically
addressed by the LEED Green Building Rating SystemTM.
In writing, using the LEEDTM Credit Equivalence process,
identify the intent of the proposed innovation credit, the proposed
requirement for compliance, the proposed submittals
to demonstrate compliance, and the design approach
used to meet the required elements.
Substantially exceed a LEEDTM performance credit such as energy performance or
water efficiency. Apply strategies or measures that are not covered by LEEDTM such
as acoustic performance, education of occupants, community development, or lifecycle
analysis of material choices.

ID-2
To support and encourage the design integration required by a LEEDTM Green Building
project and to streamline the application and certification process.
Requirement
At least one principal participant of the project team that has
successfully completed the LEEDTM Accredited Professional
exam.
Attend a LEEDTM Accredited Professional Training Workshop and successfully pass
the LEEDTM accreditation exam.