SS-1
Avoid development of inappropriate sites and reduce the environmental impact from
the location of a building on a site.
Do not develop buildings, roads or parking areas on portions of sites that
meet any one of the following criteria:
Prime farmland as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture
in the United States Code of Federal Regulations, Title 7, Volume
6, Parts 400 to 699, Section 657.5 (citation 7CFR657.5).
Land whose elevation is lower than 5 feet above the elevation of the
100-year flood as defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
Land which is specifically identified as habitat for any species on
Federal or State threatened or endangered lists.
Within 100 feet of any water including wetlands as defined by United
States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR, Parts 230-233 and Part 22,
and isolated wetlands or areas of special concern identified by state
or local rule, OR greater than distances given in state or local regulations
as defined by local or state rule or law, whichever is more
stringent.
Land which prior to acquisition for the project was public parkland,
unless land of equal or greater value as parkland is accepted in trade
by the public landowner (Park Authority projects are exempt).
Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring that the project site meets the credit requirements.
Potential Technologies & Strategies
During the site selection process, give preference to those sites that do not
include sensitive site elements and restrictive land types. Select a suitable
building location and design the building with the minimal footprint to minimize
site disruption. Strategies include stacking the building program, tuckunder
parking, and sharing facilities with neighbors.

SS-2
Channel development to urban areas with existing infrastructure, protect
greenfields and preserve habitat and natural resources.
Increase localized density to conform to existing or desired density goals by
utilizing sites that are located within an existing minimum development density
of 60,000 square feet per acre (two story downtown development).
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer, architect
or other responsible party, declaring that the project has achieved the
required development densities. Provide density for the project and for
the surrounding area.
❏ Provide an area plan with the project location highlighted.
Potential Technologies & Strategies
During the site selection process, give preference to urban sites.

SS-3
Rehabilitate damaged sites where development is complicated by real or
perceived environmental contamination, reducing pressure on undeveloped
land.
Develop on a site documented as contaminated (by means of an ASTM E1903-
97 Phase II Environmental Site Assessment) OR on a site classified as a
brownfield by a local, state or federal government agency. Effectively remediate
site contamination.
❏ Provide a copy of the pertinent sections of the ASTM E1903-97 Phase II
Environmental Site Assessment documenting the site contamination OR
provide a letter from a local, state or federal regulatory agency confirming
that the site is classified as a brownfield by that agency.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring the type of damage that existed on the site and
describing the remediation performed.
During the site selection process, give preference to brownfield sites. Identify
tax incentives and property cost savings. Develop and implement a site
remediation plan using strategies such as pump-and-treat, bioreactors, land
farming and in-situ remediation.

SS-4.1
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
Locate project within 1/2 mile of a commuter rail, light rail or subway station
or 1/4 mile of two or more public or campus bus lines usable by building
occupants.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by an appropriate party, declaring that
the project building(s) are located within required proximity to mass transit.
❏ Provide an area drawing or transit map highlighting the building
location and the fixed rail stations and bus lines, and indicate the distances
between them. Include a scale bar for distance measurement.
Potential Technologies & Strategies
Perform a transportation survey of future building occupants to identify transportation
needs. Site the building near mass transit.

SS-4.2
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
For commercial or institutional buildings, provide secure bicycle storage with
convenient changing/shower facilities (within 200 yards of the building) for
5% or more of regular building occupants. For residential buildings, provide
covered storage facilities for securing bicycles for 15% or more of building
occupants in lieu of changing/shower facilities.
❏ For commercial projects: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by
the Architect or responsible party, declaring the distance to bicycle storage
and showers from the building entrance and demonstrating that these
facilities can accommodate at least 5% of building occupants.
OR
❏ For residential projects: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the
architect or responsible party, declaring the design occupancy for the
buildings, number of covered bicycle storage facilities for securing bicycles,
and demonstrating that these facilities can accommodate at least
15% of building occupants.
Design the building with transportation amenities such as bicycle racks and
showering/changing facilities.

SS-4.3
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
Provide alternative fuel vehicles for 3% of building occupants AND provide
preferred parking for these vehicles, OR install alternative-fuel refueling stations
for 3% of the total vehicle parking capacity of the site. Liquid or gaseous
fueling facilities must be separately ventilated or located outdoors.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template and proof of ownership of, or 2 year
lease agreement for, alternative fuel vehicles and calculations indicating
that alternative fuel vehicles will serve 3% of building occupants. Provide
site drawings or parking plan highlighting preferred parking for alternative
fuel vehicles.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template with specifications and site drawings
highlighting alternative-fuel refueling stations. Provide calculations demonstrating
that these facilities accommodate 3% or more of the total vehicle
parking capacity.
Provide transportation amenities such as alternative fuel refueling stations
and carpool/vanpool programs. Consider sharing the costs and benefits of
refueling stations with neighbors.

SS-4.4
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from single occupancy vehicle
use.
Size parking capacity to meet, but not exceed, minimum local zoning requirements
AND provide preferred parking for carpools or vanpools capable
of serving 5% of the building occupants; OR add no new parking for rehabilitation
projects AND provide preferred parking for carpools or vanpools capable
of serving 5% of the building occupants.
❏ For new projects: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil
engineer or responsible party, stating any relevant minimum zoning requirements
and declaring that parking capacity is sized to meet, but not
exceed them. State the number of preferred parking spaces for carpools.
OR
❏ For rehabilitation projects: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by
the civil engineer or responsible party, declaring that no new parking
capacity has been added.State the number of preferred parking spaces
for carpools.
Minimize parking lot/garage size. Consider sharing parking facilities with
adjacent buildings.

SS-5.1
Conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat
and promote biodiversity.
On greenfield sites, limit site disturbance including earthwork and clearing of
vegetation to 40 feet beyond the building perimeter, 5 feet beyond primary
roadway curbs, walkways and main utility branch trenches, and 25 feet beyond
constructed areas with permeable surfaces (such as pervious paving
areas, stormwater detention facilities and playing fields) that require additional
staging areas in order to limit compaction in the constructed area; OR,
on previously developed sites, restore a minimum of 50% of the site area
(excluding the building footprint) by replacing impervious surfaces with native
or adapted vegetation.
❏ For greenfield sites: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil
engineer or responsible party, demonstrating and declaring that site disturbance
(including earthwork and clearing of vegetation) has been limited
to 40 feet beyond the building perimeter, 5 feet beyond primary
roadway curbs, walk ways and main utility branch trenches, and 25 feet
beyond constructed areas with permeable surfaces. Provide site drawings
and specifications highlighting limits of construction disturbance.
OR
❏ For previously developed sites: provide a LEED Letter Template, signed
by the civil engineer or responsible party, declaring and describing restoration
of degraded habitat areas. Include highlighted site drawings with
area calculations demonstrating that 50% of the site area that does not
fall within the building footprint has been restored.
Perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for
development of the project site. Select a suitable building location and design
the building with a minimal footprint to minimize site disruption. Strategies
include stacking the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing facilities
with neighbors. Establish clearly marked construction boundaries to minimize
disturbance of the existing site and restore previously degraded areas to
their natural state.

SS-5.2
Conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat
and promote biodiversity.
Reduce the development footprint (defined as entire building footprint, access
roads and parking) to exceed the local zoning’s open space requirement
for the site by 25%. For areas with no local zoning requirements (e.g., some
university campuses and military bases), designate open space area adjacent
to the building that is equal to the development footprint.
❏ Provide a copy of the local zoning requirements highlighting the criteria
for open space. Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil
engineer or responsible party, demonstrating and declaring that the open
space exceeds the local zoning open space requirement for the site by
25%.
OR
❏ For areas with no local zoning requirements (e.g., some university campuses
and military bases), designate open space area adjacent to the
building that is equal to the development footprint. Provide a letter from
the property owner stating that the open space will be conserved for the
life of the building.
Perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for
development of the project site. Select a suitable building location and design
the building with a minimal footprint to minimize site disruption. Strategies
include stacking the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing facilities
with neighbors. Establish clearly marked construction boundaries to minimize
disturbance of existing and restore previously degraded areas to their
natural state.

SS-6.1
Limit disruption and pollution of natural water flows by managing stormwater
runoff.
If existing imperviousness is less than or equal to 50%, implement a stormwater
management plan that prevents the post-development 1.5 year, 24 hour peak
discharge rate from exceeding the pre-development 1.5 year, 24 hour peak
discharge rate.
OR
If existing imperviousness is greater than 50%, implement a stormwater management
plan that results in a 25% decrease in the rate and quantity of
stormwater runoff.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring that the post-development 1.5 year, 24 hour peak
discharge rate does not exceed the pre-development 1.5 year 24 hour
peak discharge rate. Include calculations demonstrating that existing site
imperviousness is less than or equal to 50%.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring and demonstrating that the stormwater management
strategies result in at least a 25% decrease in the rate and quantity of
stormwater runoff. Include calculations demonstrating that existing site
imperviousness exceeds 50%.
Design the project site to maintain natural stormwater flows by promoting
infiltration. Specify garden roofs and pervious paving to minimize impervious
surfaces. Reuse stormwater volumes generated for non-potable uses such
as landscape irrigation, toilet and urinal flushing and custodial uses.

SS-6.2
Limit disruption of natural water flows by eliminating stormwater runoff,
increasing on-site infiltration and eliminating contaminants.
Construct site stormwater treatment systems designed to remove 80% of the
average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) and 40% of
the average annual post-development total phosphorous (TP) based on the
average annual loadings from all storms less than or equal to the 2-year/24-
hour storm. Do so by implementing Best Management Practices (BMPs) outlined
in Chapter 4, Part 2 (Urban Runoff ), of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Guidance Specifying Management Measures for Sources
of Nonpoint Pollution in Coastal Waters, January 1993 (Document No. EPA-840-B-92-
002) or the local government’s BMP document (whichever is more stringent).
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring that the design complies with or exceeds EPA or
local government Best Management Practices (whichever set is more stringent)
for removal of total suspended solids and total phosphorous.
Design mechanical or natural treatment systems such as constructed wetlands,
vegetated filter strips and bioswales to treat the site’s stormwater.

SS-7.1
Reduce heat islands (thermal gradient differences between developed and
undeveloped areas) to minimize impact on microclimate and human and
wildlife habitat.
Provide shade (within 5 years) and/or use light-colored/high-albedo materials
(reflectance of at least 0.3) and/or open grid pavement for at least 30% of
the site’s non-roof impervious surfaces, including parking lots, walkways,
plazas, etc.; OR place a minimum of 50% of parking spaces underground or
covered by structured parking; OR use an open-grid pavement system (less
than 50% impervious) for a minimum of 50% of the parking lot area.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, referencing the site plan to demonstrate areas of paving, landscaping
(list species) and building footprint, and declaring that:
❏ A minimum of 30% of non-roof impervious surfaces areas are constructed
with high-albedo materials and/or open grid pavement and/
or will be shaded within five years
❏ OR a minimum of 50% of parking spaces have been placed underground
or are covered by structured parking
❏ OR an open-grid pavement system (less than 50% impervious) has
been used for a minimum of 50% of the parking lot area.
Shade constructed surfaces on the site with landscape features and minimize
the overall building footprint. Consider replacing constructed surfaces (i.e. roof,
roads, sidewalks, etc.) with vegetated surfaces such as garden roofs and open
grid paving or specify high-albedo materials to reduce the heat absorption.

SS-7.2
Reduce heat islands (thermal gradient differences between developed and
undeveloped areas) to minimize impact on microclimate and human and
wildlife habitat.
Use ENERGY STAR® compliant (highly reflective) AND high emissivity roofing
(emissivity of at least 0.9 when tested in accordance with ASTM 408) for a
minimum of 75% of the roof surface; OR install a “green” (vegetated) roof for
at least 50% of the roof area. Combinations of high albedo and vegetated roof
can be used providing they collectively cover 75% of the roof area.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, civil engineer
or responsible party, referencing the building plan and declaring that the
roofing materials comply with the ENERGY STAR® Label requirements and
have a minimum emissivity of 0.9. Demonstrate that high-albedo and
vegetated roof areas combined constitute at least 75% of the total roof area.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, civil engineer
or responsible party, referencing the building plan and demonstrating
that vegetated roof areas constitute at least 50% of the total roof area.
Visit the ENERGY STAR® Web site, www.energystar.gov, to look for compliant
products. Consider installing high-albedo and vegetated roofs to reduce heat
absorption.

SS-8
Eliminate light trespass from the building and site, improve night sky access
and reduce development impact on nocturnal environments.
Meet or provide lower light levels and uniformity ratios than those recommended
by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
Recommended Practice Manual: Lighting for Exterior Environments (RP-33-99). Design
exterior lighting such that all exterior luminaires with more than 1000
initial lamp lumens are shielded and all luminaires with more than 3500
initial lamp lumens meet the Full Cutoff IESNA Classification. The maximum
candela value of all interior lighting shall fall within the building (not out
through windows) and the maximum candela value of all exterior lighting
shall fall within the property. Any luminaire within a distance of 2.5 times its
mounting height from the property boundary shall have shielding such that
no light from that luminaire crosses the property boundary.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by an appropriate party, declaring
that the credit requirements have been met.
Adopt site lighting criteria to maintain safe light levels while avoiding off-site
lighting and night sky pollution. Minimize site lighting where possible and
model the site lighting using a computer model. Technologies to reduce light
pollution include full cutoff luminaries, low-reflectance surfaces and lowangle
spotlights.

WE-1.1
Limit or eliminate the use of potable water for landscape irrigation.
Use high-efficiency irrigation technology OR use captured rain or recycled
site water to reduce potable water consumption for irrigation by 50% over
conventional means.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, engineer or
responsible party, declaring that potable water consumption for site irrigation
has been reduced by 50%. Include a brief narrative of the equipment
used and/or the use of drought-tolerant or native plants.
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate landscape types and
design the landscape with indigenous plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation
requirements. Use high-efficiency irrigation systems and consider using
stormwater and/or greywater for irrigation.

WE-1.2
Limit or eliminate the use of potable water for landscape irrigation.
Use only captured rain or recycled site water to eliminate all potable water
use for site irrigation (except for initial watering to establish plants), OR do
not install permanent landscape irrigation systems.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the responsible architect
and/or engineer, declaring that the project site will not use potable water
for irrigation. Include a narrative describing the captured rain system, the
recycled site water system, and their holding capacity. List all the plant
species used. Include calculations demonstrating that irrigation requirements
can be met from captured rain or recycled site water.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the landscape architect or
responsible party, declaring that the project site does not have a permanent
landscape irrigation system. Include a narrative describing how the
landscape design allows for this.
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate landscape types and
design the landscape with indigenous plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation
requirements. Consider using stormwater and/or greywater for irrigation.

WE-2
Reduce generation of wastewater and potable water demand, while increasing
the local aquifer recharge.
Reduce the use of municipally provided potable water for building sewage
conveyance by a minimum of 50%, OR treat 100% of wastewater on site to
tertiary standards.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, MEP engineer
or responsible party, declaring that water for building sewage conveyance
will be reduced by at least 50%. Include the spreadsheet calculation
and a narrative demonstrating the measures used to reduce wastewater
by at least 50% from baseline conditions.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the civil engineer or responsible
party, declaring that 100% of wastewater will be treated to tertiary
standards on site. Include a narrative describing the on-site wastewater
treatment system.
Specify high-efficiency fixtures and dry fixtures such as composting toilets
and waterless urinals to reduce wastewater volumes. Consider reusing
stormwater or greywater for sewage conveyance or on-site wastewater treatment
systems (mechanical and/or natural).

WE-3.1
Maximize water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal
water supply and wastewater systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use 20% less water than the water use
baseline calculated for the building (not including irrigation) after meeting
the Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture performance requirements.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the MEP engineer or responsible
party, declaring that the project uses 20% less water than the
baseline fixture performance requirements of the Energy Policy Act of
1992.
❏ Provide the spreadsheet calculation demonstrating that water-consuming
fixtures specified for the stated occupancy and use of the building reduce
occupancy-based potable water consumption by 20% compared to baseline
conditions.
Estimate the potable and non-potable water needs for the building. Use highefficiency
fixtures, dry fixtures such as composting toilets and waterless urinals,
and occupant sensors to reduce the potable water demand. Consider
reuse of stormwater and greywater for non-potable applications such as toilet
and urinal flushing, mechanical systems and custodial uses.

WE-3.2
Maximize water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal
water supply and wastewater systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use 30% less water than the water use
baseline calculated for the building (not including irrigation) after meeting
the Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture performance requirements.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the MEP engineer or responsible
party, declaring that the project uses 30% less water than the
baseline fixture performance requirements of the Energy Policy Act of
1992.
❏ Provide the spreadsheet calculation demonstrating that water-consuming
fixtures specified for the stated occupancy and use of the building reduce
occupancy-based potable water consumption by 30% compared to baseline
conditions.
Estimate the potable and non-potable water needs for the building. Use highefficiency
fixtures, dry fixtures such as composting toilets and waterless urinals,
and occupant sensors to reduce the potable water demand. Consider
reuse of stormwater and greywater for non-potable applications such as toilet
and urinal flushing, mechanical systems and custodial uses.

EA-1
Achieve increasing levels of energy performance above the prerequisite standard
to reduce environmental impacts associated with excessive energy use.
Reduce design energy cost compared to the energy cost budget for energy
systems regulated by ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-1999 (without amendments),
as demonstrated by a whole building simulation using the Energy
Cost Budget Method described in Section 11 of the Standard.
New Bldgs. Existing Bldgs. Points
15% 5% 1
20% 10% 2
25% 15% 3
30% 20% 4
35% 25% 5
40% 30% 6
45% 35% 7
50% 40% 8
55% 45% 9
60% 50% 10
Regulated energy systems include HVAC (heating, cooling, fans and pumps),
service hot water and interior lighting. Non-regulated systems include plug
loads, exterior lighting, garage ventilation and elevators (vertical transportation).
Two methods may be used to separate energy consumption for regulated
systems. The energy consumption for each fuel may be prorated according
to the fraction of energy used by regulated and non-regulated energy.
Alternatively, separate meters (accounting) may be created in the energy
simulation program for regulated and non-regulated energy uses.
If an analysis has been made comparing the proposed design to local energy
standards and a defensible equivalency (at minimum) to ASHRAE/IESNA Standard
90.1-1999 has been established, then the comparison against the local
code may be used in lieu of the ASHRAE Standard.
Project teams are encouraged to apply for innovation credits if the energy
consumption of non-regulated systems is also reduced.
Complete the LEED Letter Template incorporating a quantitative summary
table showing the energy saving strategies incorporated in the building
design.
❏ Demonstrate via summary printout from energy simulation software that
the design energy cost is less than the energy cost budget as defined in
ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-1999, Section 11.
Design the building envelope and building systems to maximize energy performance.
Use a computer simulation model to assess the energy performance
and identify the most cost-effective energy efficiency measures. Quantify
energy performance as compared to a baseline building.

EA-2.1
Encourage and recognize increasing levels of on-site renewable energy selfsupply
in order to reduce environmental impacts associated with fossil fuel
energy use.
Supply at least 5% of the building’s total energy use (as expressed as a fraction
of annual energy cost) through the use of on-site renewable energy
systems.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or responsible
party, declaring that at least 5% of the building’s energy is
provided by on-site renewable energy. Include a narrative describing onsite
renewable energy systems installed in the building and calculations
demonstrating that at least 5% of total energy costs are supplied by the
renewable energy system(s).
Assess the project for non-polluting and renewable energy potential including
solar, wind, geothermal, low-impact hydro, biomass and bio-gas strategies.
When applying these strategies, take advantage of net metering with the
local utility.

EA-2.2
Encourage and recognize increasing levels of self-supply through renewable
technologies to reduce environmental impacts associated with fossil fuel energy
use.
Supply at least 10% of the building’s total energy use (as expressed as a
fraction of annual energy cost) through the use of on-site renewable energy
systems.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or responsible
party, declaring that at least 10% of the building’s energy is
provided by on-site renewable energy. Include a narrative describing onsite
renewable energy systems installed in the building and calculations
demonstrating that at least 10% of total energy costs are supplied by the
renewable energy system(s).
Assess the project for non-polluting renewable energy potential including
solar, wind, geothermal, low-impact hydro, biomass and bio-gas strategies.
When applying these strategies, take advantage of net metering with the
local utility.

EA-2.3
Encourage and recognize increasing levels of self-supply through renewable
technologies to reduce environmental impacts associated with fossil fuel energy
use.
Supply at least 20% of the building’s total energy use (as expressed as a
fraction of annual energy cost) through the use of on-site renewable energy
systems.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or responsible
party, declaring that at least 20% of the building’s energy is
provided by on-site renewable energy. Include a narrative describing onsite
renewable energy systems installed in the building and calculations
demonstrating that at least 20% of total energy costs are supplied by the
renewable energy system(s).
Assess the project for non-polluting and renewable energy potential including
solar, wind, geothermal, low-impact hydro, biomass and bio-gas strategies.
When applying these strategies, take advantage of net metering with the
local utility.

EA-3
Verify and ensure that the entire building is designed, constructed and calibrated
to operate as intended.
In addition to the Fundamental Building Commissioning prerequisite, implement
or have a contract in place to implement the following additional commissioning
tasks:
1. A commissioning authority independent of the design team shall conduct
a review of the design prior to the construction documents phase.
2. An independent commissioning authority shall conduct a review of
the construction documents near completion of the construction document
development and prior to issuing the contract documents for
construction.
3. An independent commissioning authority shall review the contractor
submittals relative to systems being commissioned.
4. Provide the owner with a single manual that contains the information
required for re-commissioning building systems.
5. Have a contract in place to review building operation with O&M staff,
including a plan for resolution of outstanding commissioning-related
issues within one year after construction completion date.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the owner or independent
commissioning agent(s) as appropriate, confirming that the required additional
commissioning tasks have been successfully executed or will be
provided under existing contract(s).
Engage the commissioning authority early in the design phases

EA-4
Reduce ozone depletion and support early compliance with the Montreal
Protocol.
Install base building level HVAC and refrigeration equipment and fire suppression
systems that do not contain HCFCs or Halons.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or engineer,
stating that HVAC&R systems as-built are free of HCFCs and Halons.
When reusing buildings, inventory existing building systems using refrigerants
and fire suppression chemicals and replace those that contain HCFCs or
Halons. For new buildings, specify refrigeration and fire suppression systems
that use no HCFCs or Halons.

EA-5
Provide for the ongoing accountability and optimization of building energy
and water consumption performance over time.
Install continuous metering equipment for the following end-uses:
 Lighting systems and controls
 Constant and variable motor loads
 Variable frequency drive (VFD) operation
 Chiller efficiency at variable loads (kW/ton)
 Cooling load
 Air and water economizer and heat recovery cycles
 Air distribution static pressures and ventilation air volumes
 Boiler efficiencies
 Building-related process energy systems and equipment
 Indoor water risers and outdoor irrigation systems
Develop a Measurement and Verification plan that incorporates the monitoring
information from the above end-uses and is consistent with Option B, C
or D of the 2001 International Performance Measurement & Verification Protocol
(IPMVP) Volume I: Concepts and Options for Determining Energy and Water Savings.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the licensed engineer or
other responsible party, indicating that metering equipment has been
installed for each end-use and declaring the option to be followed under
IPMVP version 2001.
❏ Provide a copy of the M&V plan following IPMVP, 2001version, including
an executive summary.
Model the energy and water systems to predict savings. Design the building
with equipment to measure energy and water performance. Draft a Measurement
& Verification Plan to apply during building operation that compares
predicted savings to those actually achieved in the field.

EA-6
Encourage the development and use of grid-source, renewable energy technologies
on a net zero pollution basis.
Provide at least 50% of the building’s electricity from renewable sources by
engaging in at least a two-year renewable energy contract. Renewable sources
are as defined by the Center for Resource Solutions (CRS) Green-e products
certification requirements.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the owner or other responsible
party, documenting that the supplied renewable power is equal to
50% of the project’s energy consumption and the sources meet the Greene
definition of renewable energy.
❏ Provide a copy of the two-year electric utility purchase contract for power
generated from renewable sources.
Determine the energy needs of the building and investigate opportunities to engage in a
green power contract with the local utility. Green power is derived from solar, wind, geothermal,
biomass or low-impact hydro sources. Green power may be procured from a
Green-e certified power marketer, a Green-e accredited utility program, through Green-e
certified Tradable Renewable Certificates, or from a supply that meets the Green-e renewable
power definition.Visit www.green-e.org for details about the Green-e program.

MR-1.1
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain
cultural resources, reduce waste and reduce environmental impacts of new
buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain at least 75% of existing building structure and shell (exterior skin
and framing, excluding window assemblies and non-structural roofing material).
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, listing the retained elements and declaring that the
credit requirements have been met.
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, shell and non-shell
elements. Remove elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants
and upgrade outdated components such as windows, mechanical systems
and plumbing fixtures. Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-1.2
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain
cultural resources, reduce waste and reduce environmental impacts of new
buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain an additional 25% (100% total) of existing building structure and
shell (exterior skin and framing, excluding window assemblies and nonstructural
roofing material).
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, demonstrating the retained elements and declaring that
the credit requirements have been met.
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, shell and non-shell
elements. Remove elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants
and upgrade outdated components such as windows, mechanical systems
and plumbing fixtures. Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-1.3
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain
cultural resources, reduce waste and reduce environmental impacts of new
buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain 100% of existing building structure and shell (exterior skin and
framing, excluding window assemblies and non-structural roofing material)
AND at least 50% of non-shell areas (interior walls, doors, floor coverings
and ceiling systems).
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, demonstrating the retained elements and declaring that
the credit requirements have been met.
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, shell and non-shell
elements. Remove elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants
and upgrade outdated components such as windows, mechanical systems
and plumbing fixtures. Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-2.1
Divert construction, demolition and land clearing debris from landfill disposal.
Redirect recyclable recovered resources back to the manufacturing
process. Redirect reusable materials to appropriate sites.
Develop and implement a waste management plan, quantifying material diversion
goals. Recycle and/or salvage at least 50% of construction, demolition
and land clearing waste. Calculations can be done by weight or volume,
but must be consistent throughout.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, tabulating the total waste material, quantities diverted
and the means by which diverted, and declaring that the credit requirements
have been met.
Establish goals for landfill diversion and adopt a construction waste management
plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling land clearing debris,
cardboard, metal, brick, concrete, plastic, clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard,
carpet and insulation. Designate a specific area on the construction
site for recycling and track recycling efforts throughout the construction process.
Identify construction haulers and recyclers to handle the designated
materials. Note that salvage may include donation of materials to charitable
organizations such as Habitat for Humanity.

MR-2.2
Divert construction, demolition and land clearing debris from landfill disposal.
Redirect recyclable recovered resources back to the manufacturing
process. Redirect reusable materials to appropriate sites.
Develop and implement a waste management plan, quantifying material diversion
goals. Recycle and/or salvage an additional 25% (75% total) of construction,
demolition and land clearing waste. Calculations can be done by
weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, tabulating the total waste material, quantities diverted
and the means by which diverted, and declaring that the credit requirements
have been met.
Establish goals for landfill diversion and adopt a construction waste management
plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling land clearing debris,
cardboard, metal, brick, concrete, plastic, clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard,
carpet and insulation. Designate a specific area on the construction
site for recycling and track recycling efforts throughout the construction process.
Identify construction haulers and recyclers to handle the designated
materials. Note that salvage may include donation of materials to charitable
organizations such as Habitat for Humanity.

MR-3.1
Reuse building materials and products in order to reduce demand for virgin
materials and to reduce waste, thereby reducing impacts associated with the
extraction and processing of virgin resources.
Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials, products and furnishings for at
least 5% of building materials.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met
and listing each material or product used to meet the credit. Include
details demonstrating that the project incorporates the required percentage
of reused materials and products and showing their costs and the
total cost of materials for the project.
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvaged materials into building design
and research potential material suppliers. Consider salvaged materials such
as beams and posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry and
furniture, brick and decorative items.

MR-3.2
Reuse building materials and products in order to reduce demand for virgin
materials and to reduce waste, thereby reducing impacts associated with the
extraction and processing of virgin resources.
Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials, products and furnishings for at
least 10% of building materials.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met
and listing each material or product used to meet the credit. Include
details demonstrating that the project incorporates the required percentage
of reused materials and products and showing their costs and the
total cost of all materials for the project.
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvaged materials into building design
and research potential material suppliers. Consider salvaged materials such
as beams and posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry and
furniture, brick and decorative items.

MR-4.1
Increase demand for building products that incorporate recycled content
materials, therefore reducing impacts resulting from extraction and processing
of new virgin materials.
Use materials with recycled content such that the sum of post-consumer
recycled content plus one-half of the post-industrial content constitutes at
least 5% of the total value of the materials in the project.
The value of the recycled content portion of a material or furnishing shall be
determined by dividing the weight of recycled content in the item by the total
weight of all material in the item, then multiplying the resulting percentage
by the total value of the item.
Mechanical and electrical components shall not be included in this calculation.
Recycled content materials shall be defined in accordance with the Federal
Trade Commission document, Guides for the Use of Environmental Marketing
Claims, 16 CFR 260.7 (e), available at www.ftc.gov/bcp/grnrule/
guides980427.htm.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials and identify material
suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the
specified recycled content materials are installed and quantify the total percentage
of recycled content materials installed.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met
and listing the recycled content products used. Include details demonstrating
that the project incorporates the required percentage of recycled
content materials and products and showing their cost and percentage(s)
of post-consumer and/or post-industrial content, and the total cost of all
materials for the project.

MR-4.2
Increase demand for building products that incorporate recycled content
materials, therefore reducing the impacts resulting from extraction and processing
of new virgin materials.
Use materials with recycled content such that the sum of post-consumer
recycled content plus one-half of the post-industrial content constitutes at
least 10% of the total value of the materials in the project.
The value of the recycled content portion of a material or furnishing shall be
determined by dividing the weight of recycled content in the item by the total
weight of all material in the item, then multiplying the resulting percentage
by the total value of the item.
Mechanical and electrical components shall not be included in this calculation.
Recycled content materials shall be defined in accordance with the Federal
Trade Commission document, Guides for the Use of Environmental Marketing
Claims, 16 CFR 260.7 (e), available at www.ftc.gov/bcp/grnrule/
guides980427.htm.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or other
responsible party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met
and listing the recycled content products used. Include details demonstrating
that the project incorporates the required percentage of recycled
content materials and products and showing their cost and percentage(s)
of post-consumer and/or post-industrial content, and the total cost of all
materials for the project.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials and identify material
suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the
specified recycled content materials are installed and quantify the total percentage
of recycled content materials installed.

MR-5.1
Increase demand for building materials and products that are extracted and
manufactured within the region, thereby supporting the regional economy
and reducing the environmental impacts resulting from transportation .
Use a minimum of 20% of building materials and products that are manufactured*
regionally within a radius of 500 miles.
* Manufacturing refers to the final assembly of components into the building product that is
furnished and installed by the tradesmen. For example, if the hardware comes from Dallas,
Texas, the lumber from Vancouver, British Columbia, and the joist is assembled in Kent,
Washington; then the location of the final assembly is Kent, Washington.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met. Include calculations
demonstrating that the project incorporates the required percentage
of regional materials/products and showing their cost, percentage
of regional components, distance from project to manufacturer, and
the total cost of all materials for the project.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials and identify materials
and material suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure
that the specified local materials are installed and quantify the total percentage
of local materials installed.

MR-5.2
Increase demand for building materials and products that are extracted and
manufactured within the region, thereby supporting the regional economy
and reducing the environmental impacts resulting from transportation.
Of the regionally manufactured materials documented for MR Credit 5.1, use
a minimum of 50% of building materials and products that are extracted,
harvested or recovered (as well as manufactured) within 500 miles of the project site.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible party,
declaring that the credit requirements have been met. Include calculations demonstrating
that the project incorporates the required percentage of regional materials/
products and showing their cost, percentage of regional components, distance
from project to manufacturer, and the total cost of all materials for the project.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials and identify materials
and material suppliers that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure
that the specified local materials are installed and quantify the total percentage
of local materials installed.

MR-6
Reduce the use and depletion of finite raw materials and long-cycle renewable materials
by replacing them with rapidly renewable materials.
Use rapidly renewable building materials and products (made from plants
that are typically harvested within a ten-year cycle or shorter) for 5% of the
total value of all building materials and products used in the project.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met. Include calculations
demonstrating that the project incorporates the required percentage
of rapidly renewable products. Show their cost and percentage
of rapidly renewable components, and the total cost of all materials for
the project.
Establish a project goal for rapidly renewable materials and identify materials
and suppliers that can achieve this goal. Consider materials such as bamboo
flooring, wool carpets, straw board, cotton batt insulation, linoleum flooring,
poplar OSB, sunflower seed board, wheatgrass cabinetry and others. During
construction, ensure that the specified rapidly renewable materials are installed.

MR-7
Encourage environmentally responsible forest management.
Use a minimum of 50% of wood-based materials and products, certified in
accordance with the Forest Stewardship Council’s Principles and Criteria, for
wood building components including, but not limited to, structural framing
and general dimensional framing, flooring, finishes, furnishings, and nonrented
temporary construction applications such as bracing, concrete form
work and pedestrian barriers.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, owner or responsible
party, declaring that the credit requirements have been met
and listing the FSC-certified materials and products used. Include calculations
demonstrating that the project incorporates the required percentage
of FSC-certified materials/products and their cost together with the total
cost of all materials for the project. For each material/product used to
meet these requirements, provide the vendor’s or manufacturer’s Forest
Stewardship Council chain-of-custody certificate number.
Establish a project goal for FSC-certified wood products and identify suppliers
that can achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the FSC-certified
wood products are installed and quantify the total percentage of FSCcertified
wood products installed.

EQ-1
Provide capacity for indoor air quality (IAQ) monitoring to help sustain longterm
occupant comfort and well-being.
Install a permanent carbon dioxide (CO2) monitoring system that provides
feedback on space ventilation performance in a form that affords operational
adjustments. Refer to the CO2 differential for all types of occupancy in accordance
with ASHRAE 62-2001, Appendix D.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the mechanical engineer or
responsible party, declaring and summarizing the installation, operational
design and controls/zones for the carbon dioxide monitoring system. For
mixed-use buildings, calculate CO2 levels for each separate activity level
and use.
Design the HVAC system with carbon dioxide monitoring sensors and integrate
these sensors with the building automation system (BAS).

EQ-2
Provide for the effective delivery and mixing of fresh air to support the safety,
comfort and well-being of building occupants.
For mechanically ventilated buildings, design ventilation systems that result in
an air change effectiveness (Eac) greater than or equal to 0.9 as determined by
ASHRAE 129-1997. For naturally ventilated spaces demonstrate a distribution
and laminar flow pattern that involves not less than 90% of the room or zone
area in the direction of air flow for at least 95% of hours of occupancy.
❏ For mechanically ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template,
signed by the mechanical engineer or responsible party, declaring that
the design achieves an air change effectiveness (Eac) of 0.9 or greater in
each ventilated zone. Complete the table summarizing the air change
effectiveness achieved for each zone.
OR
❏ For mechanically ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed
by the mechanical engineer or responsible party, declaring that the design
complies with the recommended design approaches in ASHRAE 2001 Fundamentals
Chapter 32, Space Air Diffusion.
OR
❏ For naturally ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed
by the mechanical engineer or responsible party, declaring that the design
provides effective ventilation in at least 90% of each room or zone
area in the direction of airflow for at least 95% of hours of occupancy.
Include a table summarizing the airflow simulation results for each zone.
Include sketches indicating the airflow pattern for each zone.
Design the HVAC system and building envelope to optimize air change effectiveness.
Air change effectiveness can be optimized using a variety of ventilation
strategies including displacement ventilation, low-velocity ventilation,
plug-flow ventilation such as under floor or near floor delivery, and operable
windows. Test the air change effectiveness of the building after construction.

EQ-3.1
Prevent indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction/renovation
process in order to help sustain the comfort and well-being of construction
workers and building occupants.
Develop and implement an Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan for
the construction and pre-occupancy phases of the building as follows:
 During construction meet or exceed the recommended Design Approaches
of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning National Contractors
Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guideline for Occupied Buildings
under Construction, 1995, Chapter 3.
 Protect stored on-site or installed absorptive materials from moisture
damage.
 If air handlers must be used during construction, filtration media with
a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 8 must be used at
each return air grill, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2-1999.
 Replace all filtration media immediately prior to occupancy. Filtration
media shall have a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV)
of 13, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2-1999 for media installed at the
end of construction.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the general contractor or
responsible party, declaring that a Constuction IAQ Management Plan
has been developed and implemented, and listing each air filter used
during construction and at the end of construction. Include the MERV
value, manufacturer name and model number.
AND EITHER
❏ Provide 18 photographs—six photographs taken on three different occasions
during construction—along with identification of the SMACNA approach
featured by each photograph, in order to show consistent adherence
to the credit requirements
OR
❏ Declare the five Design Approaches of SMACNA IAQ Guideline for Occupied
Buildings under Construction, 1995, Chapter 3, which were used
during building construction. Include a brief description of some of the
important design approaches employed.
Adopt an IAQ management plan to protect the HVAC system during construction,
control pollutant sources and interrupt contamination pathways.
Sequence the installation of materials to avoid contamination of absorptive
materials such as insulation, carpeting, ceiling tile and gypsum wall board.

EQ-3.2
Prevent indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction/renovation
process in order to help sustain the comfort and well-being of construction
workers and building occupants.
Develop and implement an Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan for
the pre-occupancy phase as follows:
 After construction ends and prior to occupancy conduct a minimum
two-week building flush-out with new Minimum Efficiency Reporting
Value (MERV) 13 filtration media at 100% outside air. After the flushout,
replace the filtration media with new MERV 13 filtration media,
except the filters solely processing outside air.
OR
 Conduct a baseline indoor air quality testing procedure consistent
with the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s current Protocol
for Environmental Requirements, Baseline IAQ and Materials, for the Research
Triangle Park Campus, Section 01445.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect, general contractor
or responsible party, describing the building flush-out procedures
and dates.
OR
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, declaring that the referenced standard’s IAQ testing protocol has
been followed. Include a copy of the testing results.
Prior to occupancy, perform a two week building flush-out or test the contaminant
levels in the building.

EQ-4.1
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, potentially
irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and well-being of installers and occupants.
The VOC content of adhesives and sealants used must be less than the current
VOC content limits of South Coast Air Quality Management District
(SCAQMD) Rule #1168, AND all sealants used as fillers must meet or exceed
the requirements of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District Regulation
8, Rule 51.
Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, listing the adhesives and sealants used in the building and declaring
that they meet the noted requirements.
Specify Low-VOC materials in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits
are clearly stated in each section where adhesives and sealants are addressed.

EQ-4.2
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, potentially
irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and well-being of installers and occupants.
VOC emissions from paints and coatings must not exceed the VOC and chemical
component limits of Green Seal’s Standard GS-11 requirements.
Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, listing all the interior paints and coatings used in the building that
are addressed by Green Seal Standard GS-11 and stating that they comply
with the current VOC and chemical component limits of the standard.
Specify Low-VOC paints and coatings in construction documents. Ensure that
VOC limits are clearly stated in each section where paints are addressed.
1 Point

EQ-4.3
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, potentially
irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and well-being of installers and occupants.
Carpet systems must meet or exceed the requirements of the Carpet and Rug
Institute’s Green Label Indoor Air Quality Test Program.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, listing all the carpet systems used in the building and stating that
they comply with the current VOC limits of the Carpet and Rug Institute’s
Green Label Indoor Air Quality Test Program.
Specify Low-VOC carpet products and systems in construction documents.
Ensure that VOC limits are clearly stated where carpet systems are addressed.

EQ-4.4
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, potentially
irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and well-being of installers and occupants.
Composite wood and agrifiber products must contain no added urea-formaldehyde
resins.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, listing all the composite wood products used in the building and
stating that they contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins.
Specify wood and agrifiber products that contain no added urea-formaldehyde
resins.

EQ-5
Avoid exposure of building occupants to potentially hazardous chemicals
that adversely impact air quality.
Design to minimize pollutant cross-contamination of regularly occupied areas:
 Employ permanent entryway systems (grills, grates, etc.) to capture
dirt, particulates, etc. from entering the building at all high volume
entryways.
 Where chemical use occurs (including housekeeping areas and copying/
printing rooms), provide segregated areas with deck to deck partitions
with separate outside exhaust at a rate of at least 0.50 cubic
feet per minute per square foot, no air re-circulation and maintaining
a negative pressure of at least 7 PA (0.03 inches of water gauge).
 Provide drains plumbed for appropriate disposal of liquid waste in
spaces where water and chemical concentrate mixing occurs.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, declaring that:
 Permanent entryway systems (grilles, grates, etc.) to capture dirt, particulates,
etc. are provided at all high volume entryways.
 Chemical use areas and copy rooms have been physically separated
with deck-to-deck partitions; independent exhaust ventilation has been
installed at 0.50 cfm/square foot and that a negative pressure differential
of 7 PA has been achieved.
 In spaces where water and chemical concentrate mixing occurs, drains
are plumbed for environmentally appropriate disposal of liquid waste.
Design separate exhaust and plumbing systems for rooms with contaminants
to achieve physical isolation from the rest of the building. Install permanent
architectural entryway systems such as grills or grates to prevent occupantborne
contaminants from entering the building.

EQ-6.1
Provide a high level of thermal, ventilation and lighting system control by
individual occupants or specific groups in multi-occupant spaces (i.e. classrooms
or conference areas) to promote the productivity, comfort and wellbeing
of building occupants.
Provide at least an average of one operable window and one lighting control
zone per 200 square feet for all regularly occupied areas within 15 feet of the
perimeter wall.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, demonstrating and declaring that for regularly occupied perimeter
areas of the building a minimum of one operable window and one lighting
control zone are provided per 200 square feet on average.
Design the building with occupant controls for airflow, temperature and lighting.
Strategies to consider include lighting controls, task lighting and operable
windows.

EQ-6.2
Provide a high level of thermal, ventilation and lighting system control by
individual occupants or specific groups in multi-occupant spaces (i.e. classrooms
or conference areas) to promote the productivity, comfort and wellbeing
of building occupants.
Provide controls for each individual for airflow, temperature and lighting for
at least 50% of the occupants in non-perimeter, regularly occupied areas.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template, signed by the architect or responsible
party, demonstrating and declaring that controls for individual airflow,
temperature and lighting are provided for at least 50% of the occupants in
non-perimeter, regularly occupied areas.
Design the building with occupant controls for airflow, temperature and lighting.
Strategies to consider include task lighting and underfloor HVAC systems
with individual diffusers.

EQ-7.1
Provide a thermally comfortable environment that supports the productivity
and well-being of building occupants.
Comply with ASHRAE Standard 55-1992, Addenda 1995, for thermal comfort
standards including humidity control within established ranges per climate
zone. For naturally ventilated buildings, utilize the adaptive comfort temperature
boundaries, using the 90% acceptability limits as defined in the
California High Performance Schools (CHPS) Best Practices Manual, Appendix
C – A Field Based Thermal Comfort Standard for Naturally Ventilated
Buildings, Figure 2.
❏ For mechanically ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template,
signed by the engineer or responsible party, declaring that the project
complies with ASHRAE Standard 55-1992, Addenda 1995. Include a table
that identifies each thermally controlled zone, and that summarizes for
each zone the temperature and humidity control ranges and the method
of control used.
OR
❏ For naturally ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed
by the engineer or responsible party declaring that the project complies
with the 90% acceptability limits of the adaptive comfort temperature
boundaries in the California High Performance Schools (CHPS) Best Practices
Manual Appendix C – A Field Based Thermal Comfort Standard for
Naturally Ventilated Buildings, Figure 2.
Establish temperature and humidity comfort ranges and design the building
envelope and HVAC system to maintain these comfort ranges.

EQ-7.2
Provide a thermally comfortable environment that supports the productivity
and well-being of building occupants.
Comply with ASHRAE Standard 55-1992, Addenda 1995, for thermal comfort
standards including humidity control within established ranges per climate
zone. For naturally ventilated buildings, utilize the adaptive comfort temperature
boundaries, using the 90% acceptability limits as defined in the
California High Performance Schools (CHPS) Best Practices Manual, Appendix
C – A Field Based Thermal Comfort Standard for Naturally Ventilated
Buildings, Figure 2.
❏ For mechanically ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template,
signed by the engineer or responsible party, declaring that the project
complies with ASHRAE Standard 55-1992, Addenda 1995. Include a table
that identifies each thermally controlled zone, and that summarizes for
each zone the temperature and humidity control ranges and the method
of control used.
OR
❏ For naturally ventilated spaces: provide the LEED Letter Template, signed
by the engineer or responsible party declaring that the project complies
with the 90% acceptability limits of the adaptive comfort temperature
boundaries in the California High Performance Schools (CHPS) Best Practices
Manual Appendix C – A Field Based Thermal Comfort Standard for
Naturally Ventilated Buildings, Figure 2.
Establish temperature and humidity comfort ranges and design the building
envelope and HVAC system to maintain these comfort ranges.

EQ-8.1
Provide for the building occupants a connection between indoor spaces and
the outdoors through the introduction of daylight and views into the regularly
occupied areas of the building.
Achieve a minimum Daylight Factor of 2% (excluding all direct sunlight penetration)
in 75% of all space occupied for critical visual tasks. Spaces excluded
from this requirement include copy rooms, storage areas, mechanical
plant rooms, laundry and other low occupancy support areas. Other exceptions
for spaces where tasks would be hindered by the use of daylight will be
considered on their merits.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template signed by the architect or responsible
party. Provide area calculations that define the daylight zone and provide
prediction calculations or daylight simulation.
Design the building to maximize interior daylighting. Strategies to consider
include building orientation, shallow floor plates, increased building perimeter,
exterior and interior permanent shading devices, high performance glazing
and photo-integrated light sensors. Predict daylighting via calculations or
model daylighting strategies with a physical or computer model to assess
footcandle levels and daylight factors achieved.

EQ-8.2
Provide for the building occupants a connection between indoor spaces and
the outdoors through the introduction of daylight and views into the regularly
occupied areas of the building.
Achieve direct line of sight to vision glazing for building occupants in 90% of
all regularly occupied spaces. Examples of exceptions include copy rooms,
storage areas, mechanical, laundry and other low occupancy support areas.
Other exceptions will be considered on their merits.
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template and calculations describing, demonstrating
and declaring that the building occupants in 90% of regularly
occupied spaces will have direct lines of site to perimeter glazing. Provide
drawings highlighting the direct line of sight zones.
Design the building to maximize view opportunities.

ID-1
To provide design teams and projects the opportunity to be awarded points
for exceptional performance above the requirements set by the LEED Green
Building Rating System and/or innovative performance in Green Building
categories not specifically addressed by the LEED Green Building Rating System.
Credit 1.1 (1 point) In writing, identify the intent of the proposed innovation
credit, the proposed requirement for compliance,
the proposed submittals to demonstrate compliance,
and the design approach (strategies) that might be used
to meet the requirements.
Credit 1.2 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
Credit 1.3 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
Credit 1.4 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
❏ Provide the proposal(s) within the LEED Letter Template (including intent,
requirement, submittals and possible strategies) and relevant evidence
of performance achieved.
Substantially exceed a LEED performance credit such as energy performance
or water efficiency. Apply strategies or measures that are not covered by
LEED such as acoustic performance, education of occupants, community
development or lifecycle analysis of material choices.

ID-2.1
To support and encourage the design integration required by a LEED Green
Building project and to streamline the application and certification process.
At least one principal participant of the project team that has successfully
completed the LEED Accredited Professional exam
❏ Provide the LEED Letter Template stating the LEED Accredited Professional’s
name, title, company and contact information. Include a copy of this
person’s LEED Accredited Professional Certificate.
Attending a LEED Accredited Professional Training Workshop is recommended
but not required. Study the LEED Reference Guide. Successfully pass the
LEED accreditation exam.