SS-1
Avoid development of inappropriate sites and reduce the environmental impact from the location of a building
on a site.
Do not develop buildings, hardscape, roads or parking areas on portions of sites that meet any one of the following
criteria:
❑ Prime farmland as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture in the United States Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 7, Volume 6, Parts 400 to 699, Section 657.5 (citation 7CFR657.5)
❑ Previously undeveloped land whose elevation is lower than 5 feet above the elevation of the 100-year flood
as defined by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency)
❑ Land that is specifically identified as habitat for any species on Federal or State threatened or endangered
lists
❑ Within 100 feet of any wetlands as defined by United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR, Parts
230-233 and Part 22, and isolated wetlands or areas of special concern identified by state or local rule, OR
within setback distances from wetlands prescribed in state or local regulations, as defined by local or state
rule or law, whichever is more stringent
❑ Previously undeveloped land that is within 50 feet of a water body, defined as seas, lakes, rivers, streams and
tributaries which support or could support fish, recreation or industrial use, consistent with the terminology
of the Clean Water Act
❑ Land which prior to acquisition for the project was public parkland, unless land of equal or greater value as
parkland is accepted in trade by the public landowner (Park Authority projects are exempt)
During the site selection process, give preference to those sites that do not include sensitive site elements and
restrictive land types. Select a suitable building location and design the building with the minimal footprint to
minimize site disruption of those environmentally sensitive areas identified above.

SS-2
Channel development to urban areas with existing infrastructure, protect greenfields and preserve habitat and
natural resources.
OPTION 1 — DEVELOPMENT DENSITY
Construct or renovate building on a previously developed site AND in a community with a minimum density
of 60,000 square feet per acre net (Note: density calculation must include the area of the project being built and
is based on a typical two-story downtown development).
OR
OPTION 2 — COMMUNITY CONNECTIVITY
Construct or renovate building on a previously developed site AND within 1/2 mile of a residential zone or
neighborhood with an average density of 10 units per acre net AND within 1/2 mile of at least 10 Basic Services
AND with pedestrian access between the building and the services.
Basic Services include, but are not limited to:
1) Bank; 2) Place of Worship; 3) Convenience Grocery; 4) Day Care; 5) Cleaners; 6) Fire Station; 7) Beauty; 8)
Hardware; 9) Laundry; 10) Library; 11) Medical/Dental; 12) Senior Care Facility; 13) Park; 14) Pharmacy; 15)
Post Office; 16) Restaurant; 17) School; 18) Supermarket; 19) Theater; 20) Community Center; 21) Fitness
Center; 22) Museum.
Proximity is determined by drawing a 1/2 mile radius around the main building entrance on a site map and
counting the services within that radius.
During the site selection process, give preference to urban sites with pedestrian access to a variety of services.

SS-3
Rehabilitate damaged sites where development is complicated by environmental contamination, reducing pressure
on undeveloped land.
Develop on a site documented as contaminated (by means of an ASTM E1903-97 Phase II Environmental
Site Assessment or a local Voluntary Cleanup Program) OR on a site defined as a brownfield by a local, state or
federal government agency.
During the site selection process, give preference to brownfield sites. Identify tax incentives and property cost
savings. Coordinate site development plans with remediation activity, as appropriate.

SS-4.1
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
Locate project within 1/2 mile of an existing, or planned and funded, commuter rail, light rail or subway station.
OR
Locate project within 1/4 mile of one or more stops for two or more public or campus bus lines usable by building
occupants.
Perform a transportation survey of future building occupants to identify transportation needs. Site the building
near mass transit.

SS-4.2
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
For commercial or institutional buildings, provide secure bicycle racks and/or storage (within 200 yards of a
building entrance) for 5% or more of all building users (measured at peak periods), AND, provide shower and
changing facilities in the building, or within 200 yards of a building entrance, for 0.5% of Full-Time Equivalent
(FTE) occupants.
OR
For residential buildings, provide covered storage facilities for securing bicycles for 15% or more of building
occupants in lieu of changing/shower facilities.
Design the building with transportation amenities such as bicycle racks and showering/changing facilities.

SS-4.3
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
OPTION 1
Provide low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles for 3% of Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) occupants AND provide
preferred parking for these vehicles.
OR
OPTION 2
Provide preferred parking for low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles for 5% of the total vehicle parking capacity
of the site.
OR
OPTION 3
Install alternative-fuel refueling stations for 3% of the total vehicle parking capacity of the site (liquid or gaseous
fueling facilities must be separately ventilated or located outdoors).
For the purposes of this credit, low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles are defined as vehicles that are either classified
as Zero Emission Vehicles (ZEV) by the California Air Resources Board or have achieved a minimum green score of
40 on the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy (ACEEE) annual vehicle rating guide.
“Preferred parking” refers to the parking spots that are closest to the main entrance of the project (exclusive of spaces
designated for handicapped) or parking passes provided at a discounted price.
Provide transportation amenities such as alternative fuel refueling stations. Consider sharing the costs and benefits
of refueling stations with neighbors.

SS-4.4
Reduce pollution and land development impacts from single occupancy vehicle use.
OPTION 1 — NON-RESIDENTIAL
❑ Size parking capacity to meet, but not exceed, minimum local zoning requirements, AND, provide preferred
parking for carpools or vanpools for 5% of the total provided parking spaces.
OR
OPTION 2 — NON-RESIDENTIAL
For projects that provide parking for less than 5% of FTE building occupants:
❑ Provide preferred parking for carpools or vanpools, marked as such, for 5% of total provided parking spaces.
OR
OPTION 3 — RESIDENTIAL
❑ Size parking capacity to not exceed minimum local zoning requirements, AND, provide infrastructure and
support programs to facilitate shared vehicle usage such as carpool drop-off areas, designated parking for
vanpools, or car-share services, ride boards, and shuttle services to mass transit.
OR
OPTION 4 — ALL
Provide no new parking.
“Preferred parking” refers to the parking spots that are closest to the main entrance of the project (exclusive of spaces
designated for handicapped) or parking passes provided at a discounted price.
Minimize parking lot/garage size. Consider sharing parking facilities with adjacent buildings. Consider alternatives
that will limit the use of single occupancy vehicles.

SS-5.1
Conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat and promote biodiversity.
OPTION 1
On greenfield sites, limit all site disturbance to 40 feet beyond the building perimeter; 10 feet beyond surface
walkways, patios, surface parking and utilities less than 12 inches in diameter; 15 feet beyond primary roadway
curbs and main utility branch trenches; and 25 feet beyond constructed areas with permeable surfaces (such as
pervious paving areas, stormwater detention facilities and playing fields) that require additional staging areas in
order to limit compaction in the constructed area.
OR
OPTION 2
On previously developed or graded sites, restore or protect a minimum of 50% of the site area (excluding the
building footprint) with native or adapted vegetation. Native/adapted plants are plants indigenous to a locality or
cultivars of native plants that are adapted to the local climate and are not considered invasive species or noxious
weeds. Projects earning SS Credit 2 and using vegetated roof surfaces may apply the vegetated roof surface to
this calculation if the plants meet the definition of native/adapted.
Greenfield sites are those that are not previously developed or graded and remain in a natural state. Previously developed
sites are those that previously contained buildings, roadways, parking lots, or were graded or altered by direct
human activities.
On greenfield sites, perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for development of the
project site. Carefully site the building to minimize disruption to existing ecosystems and design the building to
minimize its footprint. Strategies include stacking the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing facilities
with neighbors. Establish clearly marked construction boundaries to minimize disturbance of the existing
site and restore previously degraded areas to their natural state. For previously developed sites, utilize local and
regional governmental agencies, consultants, educational facilities, and native plant societies as resources for the
selection of appropriate native or adapted plant materials. Prohibit plant materials listed as invasive or noxious
weed species. Native/adapted plants require minimal or no irrigation following establishment, do not require
active maintenance such as mowing or chemical inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides, and provide
habitat value and promote biodiversity through avoidance of monoculture plantings.

SS-5.2
Provide a high ratio of open space to development footprint to promote biodiversity.
OPTION 1
Reduce the development footprint (defined as the total area of the building footprint, hardscape, access roads
and parking) and/or provide vegetated open space within the project boundary to exceed the local zoning’s open
space requirement for the site by 25%.
OR
OPTION 2
For areas with no local zoning requirements (e.g., some university campuses, military bases), provide vegetated
open space area adjacent to the building that is equal to the building footprint.
OR
OPTION 3
Where a zoning ordinance exists, but there is no requirement for open space (zero), provide vegetated open space
equal to 20% of the project’s site area.
ALL OPTIONS:
❑ For projects located in urban areas that earn SS Credit 2, vegetated roof areas can contribute to credit compliance.
❑ For projects located in urban areas that earn SS Credit 2, pedestrian oriented hardscape areas can contribute
to credit compliance. For such projects, a minimum of 25% of the open space counted must be vegetated.
❑ Wetlands or naturally designed ponds may count as open space if the side slope gradients average 1:4 (vertical:
horizontal) or less and are vegetated.
Perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for development of the project site. Select
a suitable building location and design the building with a minimal footprint to minimize site disruption.
Strategies include stacking the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing facilities with neighbors to
maximize open space on the site.

SS-6.1
Limit disruption of natural water hydrology by reducing impervious cover, increasing on-site infiltration, reducing
or eliminating pollution from stormwater runoff, and eliminating contaminants.
CASE 1 — EXISTING IMPERVIOUSNESS IS LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 50%
Implement a stormwater management plan that prevents the post-development peak discharge rate and quantity
from exceeding the pre-development peak discharge rate and quantity for the one- and two-year 24-hour design
storms.
OR
Implement a stormwater management plan that protects receiving stream channels from excessive erosion by
implementing a stream channel protection strategy and quantity control strategies.
OR
CASE 2 — EXISTING IMPERVIOUSNESS IS GREATER THAN 50%
Implement a stormwater management plan that results in a 25% decrease in the volume of stormwater runoff
from the two-year 24-hour design storm.
Design the project site to maintain natural stormwater flows by promoting infiltration. Specify vegetated roofs,
pervious paving, and other measures to minimize impervious surfaces. Reuse stormwater volumes generated for
non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation, toilet and urinal flushing and custodial uses.

SS-6.2
Limit disruption and pollution of natural water flows by managing stormwater runoff.
Implement a stormwater management plan that reduces impervious cover, promotes infiltration, and captures
and treats the stormwater runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall using acceptable best management
practices (BMPs).
BMPs used to treat runoff must be capable of removing 80% of the average annual post development total
suspended solids (TSS) load based on existing monitoring reports. BMPs are considered to meet these criteria
if (1) they are designed in accordance with standards and specifications from a state or local program that has
adopted these performance standards, or (2) there exists in-field performance monitoring data demonstrating
compliance with the criteria. Data must conform to accepted protocol (e.g., Technology Acceptance Reciprocity
Partnership [TARP], Washington State Department of Ecology) for BMP monitoring.
Use alternative surfaces (e.g., vegetated roofs, pervious pavement or grid pavers) and nonstructural techniques
(e.g., rain gardens, vegetated swales, disconnection of imperviousness, rainwater recycling) to reduce imperviousness
and promote infiltration thereby reducing pollutant loadings.
Use sustainable design strategies (e.g., Low Impact Development, Environmentally Sensitive Design) to design
integrated natural and mechanical treatment systems such as constructed wetlands, vegetated filters, and open
channels to treat stormwater runoff.

SS-7.1
Reduce heat islands (thermal gradient differences between developed and undeveloped areas) to minimize impact
on microclimate and human and wildlife habitat.
OPTION 1
Provide any combination of the following strategies for 50% of the site hardscape (including roads, sidewalks,
courtyards and parking lots):
❑ Shade (within 5 years of occupancy)
❑ Paving materials with a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of at least 29
❑ Open grid pavement system
OR
OPTION 2
Place a minimum of 50% of parking spaces under cover (defined as under ground, under deck, under roof, or
under a building). Any roof used to shade or cover parking must have an SRI of at least 29.
Shade constructed surfaces on the site with landscape features and utilize high-reflectance materials for hardscape.
Consider replacing constructed surfaces (i.e. roof, roads, sidewalks, etc.) with vegetated surfaces such as vegetated
roofs and open grid paving or specify high-albedo materials to reduce the heat absorption.
The

SS-7.2
Reduce heat islands (thermal gradient differences between developed and undeveloped areas) to minimize impact
on microclimate and human and wildlife habitat.
OPTION 1
Use roofing materials having a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) equal to or greater than the values in the table
below for a minimum of 75% of the roof surface.
OR
OPTION 2
Install a vegetated roof for at least 50% of the roof area.
OR
OPTION 3
Install high albedo and vegetated roof surfaces that, in combination, meet the following criteria:
(Area of SRI Roof / 0.75) + (Area of vegetated roof / 0.5) >= Total Roof Area
Consider installing high-albedo and vegetated roofs to reduce heat absorption. SRI is calculated according to
ASTM E 1980. Reflectance is measured according to ASTM E 903, ASTM E 1918, or ASTM C 1549. Emittance
is measured according to ASTM E 408 or ASTM C 1371. Default values will be available in the LEED for
New Construction v2.2 Reference Guide. Product information is available from the Cool Roof Rating Council
website, at www.coolroofs.org.

SS-8
Minimize light trespass from the building and site, reduce sky-glow to increase night sky access, improve nighttime
visibility through glare reduction, and reduce development impact on nocturnal environments.
FOR INTERIOR LIGHTING
The angle of maximum candela from each interior luminaire as located in the building shall intersect opaque
building interior surfaces and not exit out through the windows.
OR
All non-emergency interior lighting shall be automatically controlled to turn off during non-business hours.
Provide manual override capability for after hours use.
AND
FOR EXTERIOR LIGHTING
Only light areas as required for safety and comfort. Do not exceed 80% of the lighting power densities for exterior
areas and 50% for building facades and landscape features as defined in ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2004,
Exterior Lighting Section, without amendments.
All projects shall be classified under one of the following zones, as defined in IESNA RP-33, and shall follow all
of the requirements for that specific zone:
LZ1 — Dark (Park and Rural Settings)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial illuminance
value no greater than 0.01 horizontal and vertical footcandles at the site boundary and beyond. Document
that 0% of the total initial designed fixture lumens are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir
(straight down).
LZ2 — Low (Residential areas)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial illuminance
value no greater than 0.10 horizontal and vertical footcandles at the site boundary and no greater than
0.01 horizontal footcandles 10 feet beyond the site boundary. Document that no more than 2% of the total
initial designed fixture lumens are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down). For
site boundaries that abut public rights-of-way, light trespass requirements may be met relative to the curb line
instead of the site boundary.
LZ3 — Medium (Commercial/Industrial, High-Density Residential)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial illuminance
value no greater than 0.20 horizontal and vertical footcandles at the site boundary and no greater than 0.01
horizontal footcandles 15 feet beyond the site. Document that no more than 5% of the total initial designed
fixture lumens are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down). For site boundaries
that abut public rights-of-way, light trespass requirements may be met relative to the curb line instead of the
site boundary.
LZ4 — High (Major City Centers, Entertainment Districts)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial illuminance
value no greater than 0.60 horizontal and vertical footcandles at the site boundary and no greater than 0.01
horizontal footcandles 15 feet beyond the site. Document that no more than 10% of the total initial designed
site lumens are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down). For site boundaries that
abut public rights-of-way, light trespass requirements may be met relative to the curb line instead of the site
boundary.
Adopt site lighting criteria to maintain safe light levels while avoiding off-site lighting and night sky pollution.
Minimize site lighting where possible and model the site lighting using a computer model. Technologies to reduce
light pollution include full cutoff luminaires, low-reflectance surfaces and low-angle spotlights.

WE-1.1
Limit or eliminate the use of potable water, or other natural surface or subsurface water resources available on
or near the project site, for landscape irrigation.
Reduce potable water consumption for irrigation by 50% from a calculated mid-summer baseline case.
Reductions shall be attributed to any combination of the following items:
❑ Plant species factor
❑ Irrigation efficiency
❑ Use of captured rainwater
❑ Use of recycled wastewater
❑ Use of water treated and conveyed by a public agency specifically for non-potable uses
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate plant material and design the landscape with native or
adapted plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation requirements. Where irrigation is required, use high-efficiency
equipment and/or climate-based controllers.

WE-1.2
Eliminate the use of potable water, or other natural surface or subsurface water resources available on or near the
project site, for landscape irrigation.
Achieve WE Credit 1.1.and:
Use only captured rainwater, recycled wastewater, recycled greywater, or water treated and conveyed by a public
agency specifically for non-potable uses for irrigation.
OR
Install landscaping that does not require permanent irrigation systems. Temporary irrigation systems used for
plant establishment are allowed only if removed within one year of installation.
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate landscape types and design the landscape with indigenous
plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation requirements. Consider using stormwater, greywater, and/or condensate
water for irrigation.

WE-2
Reduce generation of wastewater and potable water demand, while increasing the local aquifer recharge.
OPTION 1
Reduce potable water use for building sewage conveyance by 50% through the use of water-conserving fixtures
(water closets, urinals) or non-potable water (captured rainwater, recycled greywater, and on-site or municipally
treated wastewater).
OR
OPTION 2
Treat 50% of wastewater on-site to tertiary standards. Treated water must be infiltrated or used on-site.
Specify high-efficiency fixtures and dry fixtures such as composting toilet systems and non-water using urinals to
reduce wastewater volumes. Consider reusing stormwater or greywater for sewage conveyance or on-site wastewater
treatment systems (mechanical and/or natural). Options for on-site wastewater treatment include packaged
biological nutrient removal systems, constructed wetlands, and high-efficiency filtration systems.

WE-3.1
Maximize water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal water supply and wastewater
systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use 20% less water than the water use baseline calculated for the building
(not including irrigation) after meeting the Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture performance requirements. Calculations
are based on estimated occupant usage and shall include only the following fixtures (as applicable to
the building): water closets, urinals, lavatory faucets, showers and kitchen sinks.
Use high-efficiency fixtures, dry fixtures such as composting toilet systems and non-water using urinals, and occupant
sensors to reduce the potable water demand. Consider reuse of stormwater and greywater for non-potable
applications such as toilet and urinal flushing and custodial uses.

WE-3.2
Maximize water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal water supply and wastewater
systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use 30% less water than the water use baseline calculated for the building
(not including irrigation) after meeting the Energy Policy Act of 1992 fixture performance requirements. Calculations
are based on estimated occupant usage and shall include only the following fixtures (as applicable to
the building): water closets, urinals, lavatory faucets, showers and kitchen sinks.
Use high-efficiency fixtures, dry fixtures such as composting toilets and waterless urinals, and occupant sensors
to reduce the potable water demand. Consider reuse of stormwater and greywater for non-potable applications
such as toilet and urinal flushing, mechanical systems and custodial uses.

EA-1
Two (2) points mandatory for all LEED for New Construction projects registered after June 26, 2007
Achieve increasing levels of energy performance above the baseline in the prerequisite standard to reduce environmental
and economic impacts associated with excessive energy use.
Select one of the four compliance path options described below. Project teams documenting achievement using
any of these options are assumed to be in compliance with EA Prerequisite 2.
NOTE: LEED for New Construction projects registered after June 26th, 2007 are required to achieve at least two
(2) points under EAc1.
OPTION 1 — WHOLE BUILDING ENERGY SIMULATION (1–10 Points)
Demonstrate a percentage improvement in the proposed building performance rating compared to the baseline
building performance rating per ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2004 by a whole building project simulation
using the Building Performance Rating Method in Appendix G of the Standard. The minimum energy cost
savings percentage for each point threshold is as follows:
New Buildings Existing Building Renovations Points
10.5% 3.5% 1
14% 7% 2
17.5% 10.5% 3
21% 14% 4
24.5% 17.5% 5
28% 21% 6
31.5% 24.5% 7
35% 28% 8
38.5% 31.5% 9
42% 35% 10
* Note: Only projects registered prior to June 26, 2007 may pursue 1 point under EAc1.
Appendix G of Standard 90.1-2004 requires that the energy analysis done for the Building Performance Rating
Method include ALL of the energy costs within and associated with the building project. To achieve points using
this credit, the proposed design—
❑ must comply with the mandatory provisions (Sections 5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 8.4, 9.4 and 10.4) in Standard 90.1-
2004;
❑ must include all the energy costs within and associated with the building project; and
❑ must be compared against a baseline building that complies with Appendix G to Standard 90.1-2004. The
default process energy cost is 25% of the total energy cost for the baseline building. For buildings where the
process energy cost is less than 25% of the baseline building energy cost, the LEED submittal must include
supporting documentation substantiating that process energy inputs are appropriate.
For the purpose of this analysis, process energy is considered to include, but is not limited to, office and general
miscellaneous equipment, computers, elevators and escalators, kitchen cooking and refrigeration, laundry washing
and drying, lighting exempt from the lighting power allowance (e.g., lighting integral to medical equipment) and
other (e.g., waterfall pumps). Regulated (non-process) energy includes lighting (such as for the interior, parking
garage, surface parking, façade, or building grounds, except as noted above), HVAC (such as for space heating,
space cooling, fans, pumps, toilet exhaust, parking garage ventilation, kitchen hood exhaust, etc.), and service
water heating for domestic or space heating purposes.
For EA Credit 1, process loads shall be identical for both the baseline building performance rating and for the
proposed building performance rating. However, project teams may follow the Exceptional Calculation Method
(ASHRAE 90.1-2004 G2.5) to document measures that reduce process loads. Documentation of process load
energy savings shall include a list of the assumptions made for both the base and proposed design, and theoretical
or empirical information supporting these assumptions.
OR
OPTION 2 — PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE PATH: ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small
Office Buildings 2004 (4 Points)
Comply with the prescriptive measures of the ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small Office Buildings
2004. The following restrictions apply:
❑ Buildings must be under 20,000 square feet.
❑ Buildings must be office occupancy.
❑ Project teams must fully comply with all applicable criteria as established in the Advanced Energy Design
Guide for the climate zone in which the building is located.
OR
OPTION 3 — PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE PATH: Advanced Buildings™ Core Performance™ Guide
(2-5 Points)
Comply with the prescriptive measures identified in the Advanced Buildings™ Core Performance™ Guide
developed by the New Buildings Institute. The following restrictions apply:
❑ Buildings must be under 100,000 square feet.
❑ Buildings may NOT be health care, warehouse or laboratory projects.
❑ Project teams must fully comply with Sections One, Design Process Strategies, and Two, Core Performance
Requirements.
Minimum points achieved under Option 3 (2-3 points):
❑ Three (3) points are available for all office, school, public assembly, and retail projects under 100,000 square
feet that comply with Sections One and Two of the Core Performance Guide.
❑ Two (2) points are available for all other project types under 100,000 square feet (except health care, warehouse,
or laboratory projects) that implement the basic requirements of the Core Performance Guide
Additional points available under Option 3 (up to 2 additional points):
❑ Up to two (2) additional points are available to projects that implement performance strategies listed in Section
Three, Enhanced Performance. For every three strategies implemented from this section, one point is
available.
❑ Any strategies applicable to the project may be implemented except:
 3.1-Cool Roofs
 3.8-Night Venting
 3.13-Additional Commissioning
These strategies are addressed by different aspects of the LEED program and are not eligible for additional points
under EA Credit 1.
OR
OPTION 4 — PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE PATH: Advanced Buildings Benchmark™ Basic Criteria
and Prescriptive Measures (1 Point)
Note: projects registered after June 26, 2007 may not use this option
Comply with the Basic Criteria and Prescriptive Measures of the Advanced Buildings Benchmark™ Version 1.1
with the exception of the following sections: 1.7 Monitoring and Trend-logging, 1.11 Indoor Air Quality, and
1.14 Networked Computer Monitor Control. The following restrictions apply:
❑ Project teams must fully comply with all applicable criteria as established in Advanced Buildings Benchmark
for the climate zone in which the building is located.
Design the building envelope and systems to maximize energy performance. Use a computer simulation model
to assess the energy performance and identify the most cost-effective energy efficiency measures. Quantify energy
performance as compared to a baseline building.
If a local code has demonstrated quantitative and textual equivalence following, at a minimum, the U.S. Department
of Energy standard process for commercial energy code determination, then the results of that analysis may
be used to correlate local code performance with ASHRAE 90.1-2004. Details on the DOE process for commercial
energy code determination can be found at www.energycodes.gov/implement/determinations_com.stm.

EA-2
Encourage and recognize increasing levels of on-site renewable energy self-supply in order to reduce environmental
and economic impacts associated with fossil fuel energy use.
Use on-site renewable energy systems to offset building energy cost. Calculate project performance by expressing
the energy produced by the renewable systems as a percentage of the building annual energy cost and using the
table below to determine the number of points achieved.
Use the building annual energy cost calculated in EA Credit 1 or use the Department of Energy (DOE) Commercial
Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) database to determine the estimated electricity use.
(Table of use for different building types is provided in the Reference Guide.)
% Renewable Energy Points
2.5% 1
7.5% 2
12.5% 3
Assess the project for non-polluting and renewable energy potential including solar, wind, geothermal, lowimpact
hydro, biomass and bio-gas strategies. When applying these strategies, take advantage of net metering
with the local utility.

EA-3
Begin the commissioning process early during the design process and execute additional activities after systems
performance verification is completed.
Implement, or have a contract in place to implement, the following additional commissioning process activities
in addition to the requirements of EA Prerequisite 1 and in accordance with the LEED for New Construction
2.2 Reference Guide:
1. Prior to the start of the construction documents phase, designate an independent Commissioning Authority
(CxA) to lead, review, and oversee the completion of all commissioning process activities. The CxA shall, at
a minimum, perform Tasks 2, 3 and 6. Other team members may perform Tasks 4 and 5.
a. The CxA shall have documented commissioning authority experience in at least two building projects.
b. The individual serving as the CxA shall be—
i. independent of the work of design and construction;
ii. not an employee of the design firm, though they may be contracted through them;
iii. not an employee of, or contracted through, a contractor or construction manager holding construction
contracts; and
iv. (can be) a qualified employee or consultant of the Owner.
c. The CxA shall report results, findings and recommendations directly to the Owner.
d. This requirement has no deviation for project size.
2. The CxA shall conduct, at a minimum, one commissioning design review of the Owner’s Project Requirements
(OPR), Basis of Design (BOD), and design documents prior to mid-construction documents phase
and back-check the review comments in the subsequent design submission.
3. The CxA shall review contractor submittals applicable to systems being commissioned for compliance with the OPR
and BOD. This review shall be concurrent with A/E reviews and submitted to the design team and the Owner.
4. Develop a systems manual that provides future operating staff the information needed to understand and
optimally operate the commissioned systems.
5. Verify that the requirements for training operating personnel and building occupants are completed.
6. Assure the involvement by the CxA in reviewing building operation within 10 months after substantial
completion with O&M staff and occupants. Include a plan for resolution of outstanding commissioningrelated
issues.
Although it is preferable that the CxA be contracted by the Owner, for the enhanced commissioning credit, the
CxA may also be contracted through the design firms or construction management firms not holding construction
contracts.
The LEED for New Construction 2.2 Reference Guide provides detailed guidance on the rigor expected for
following process activities:
❑ Commissioning design review
❑ Commissioning submittal review
❑ Systems manual

EA-4
Reduce ozone depletion and support early compliance with the Montreal Protocol while minimizing direct
contributions to global warming.
OPTION 1
Do not use refrigerants.
OR
OPTION 2
Select refrigerants and HVAC&R that minimize or eliminate the emission of compounds that contribute to
ozone depletion and global warming. The base building HVAC&R equipment shall comply with the following
formula, which sets a maximum threshold for the combined contributions to ozone depletion and global
warming potential:
LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 100
Where:
LCODP = [ODPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life
LCGWP = [GWPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life
LCODP: Lifecycle Ozone Depletion Potential (lbCFC11/Ton-Year)
LCGWP: Lifecycle Direct Global Warming Potential (lbCO2/Ton-Year)
GWPr: Global Warming Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 12,000 lbCO2/lbr)
ODPr: Ozone Depletion Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 0.2 lbCFC11/lbr)
Lr: Refrigerant Leakage Rate (0.5% to 2.0%; default of 2% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Mr: End-of-life Refrigerant Loss (2% to 10%; default of 10% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Rc: Refrigerant Charge (0.5 to 5.0 lbs of refrigerant per ton of cooling capacity)
Life: Equipment Life (10 years; default based on equipment type, unless otherwise demonstrated)
For multiple types of equipment, a weighted average of all base building level HVAC&R equipment shall be
applied using the following formula:
[ Σ (LCGWP + LCODP x 105) x Qunit ] / Qtotal ≤ 100
Where:
Qunit = Cooling capacity of an individual HVAC or refrigeration unit (Tons)
Qtotal = Total cooling capacity of all HVAC or refrigeration
Small HVAC units (defined as containing less than 0.5 lbs of refrigerant), and other equipment such as standard
refrigerators, small water coolers, and any other cooling equipment that contains less than 0.5 lbs of refrigerant,
are not considered part of the “base building” system and are not subject to the requirements of this credit.
Do not install fire suppression systems that contain ozone-depleting substances (CFCs, HCFCs or Halons).
Design and operate the facility without mechanical cooling and refrigeration equipment. Where mechanical
cooling is used, utilize base building HVAC and refrigeration systems for the refrigeration cycle that minimize
direct impact on ozone depletion and global warming. Select HVAC&R equipment with reduced refrigerant
charge and increased equipment life. Maintain equipment to prevent leakage of refrigerant to the atmosphere.
Utilize fire suppression systems that do not contain HCFCs or Halons.

EA-5
Provide for the ongoing accountability of building energy consumption over time.
❑ Develop and implement a Measurement & Verification (M&V) Plan consistent with Option D: Calibrated
Simulation (Savings Estimation Method 2), or Option B: Energy Conservation Measure Isolation, as specified
in the International Performance Measurement & Verification Protocol (IPMVP) Volume III: Concepts and
Options for Determining Energy Savings in New Construction, April, 2003.
❑ The M&V period shall cover a period of no less than one year of post-construction occupancy.
Develop an M&V Plan to evaluate building and/or energy system performance. Characterize the building and/or
energy systems through energy simulation or engineering analysis. Install the necessary metering equipment to
measure energy use. Track performance by comparing predicted performance to actual performance, broken
down by component or system as appropriate. Evaluate energy efficiency by comparing actual performance to
baseline performance.
While the IPMVP describes specific actions for verifying savings associated with energy conservation measures
(ECMs) and strategies, this LEED credit expands upon typical IPMVP M&V objectives. M&V activities
should not necessarily be confined to energy systems where ECMs or energy conservation strategies have been
implemented. The IPMVP provides guidance on M&V strategies and their appropriate applications for various
situations. These strategies should be used in conjunction with monitoring and trend logging of significant
energy systems to provide for the ongoing accountability of building energy performance.

EA-6
Encourage the development and use of grid-source, renewable energy technologies on a net zero pollution basis.
Provide at least 35% of the building’s electricity from renewable sources by engaging in at least a two-year renewable
energy contract. Renewable sources are as defined by the Center for Resource Solutions (CRS) Green-e
products certification requirements.
DETERMINE THE BASELINE ELECTRICITY USE
Use the annual electricity consumption from the results of EA Credit 1.
OR
Use the Department of Energy (DOE) Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) database
to determine the estimated electricity use.
Determine the energy needs of the building and investigate opportunities to engage in a green power contract.
Green power is derived from solar, wind, geothermal, biomass or low-impact hydro sources. Visit www.green-e.org
for details about the Green-e program. The power product purchased to comply with credit requirements need
not be Green-e certified. Other sources of green power are eligible if they satisfy the Green-e program’s technical
requirements. Renewable energy certificates (RECs), tradable renewable certificates (TRCs), green tags and other
forms of green power that comply with Green-e’s technical requirements can be used to document compliance
with EA Credit 6 requirements.

MR-1.1
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural resources, reduce waste and
reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain at least 75% (based on surface area) of existing building structure (including structural floor and roof
decking) and envelope (exterior skin and framing, excluding window assemblies and non-structural roofing material).
Hazardous materials that are remediated as a part of the project scope shall be excluded from the calculation
of the percentage maintained. If the project includes an addition to an existing building, this credit is not applicable
if the square footage of the addition is more than 2 times the square footage of the existing building.
Consider reuse of existing, previously occupied buildings, including structure, envelope and elements. Remove
elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants and upgrade components that would improve
energy and water efficiency such as windows, mechanical systems and plumbing fixtures.

MR-1.2
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural resources, reduce waste and
reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain an additional 20% (95% total, based on surface area) of existing building structure (including structural
floor and roof decking) and envelope (exterior skin and framing, excluding window assemblies and non-structural
roofing material). Hazardous materials that are re-mediated as a part of the project scope shall be excluded
from the calculation of the percentage maintained. If the project includes an addition to an existing building,
this credit is not applicable if the square footage of the addition is more than 2 times the square footage of the
existing building.
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, envelope and elements. Remove elements that pose
contamination risk to building occupants and upgrade components that would improve energy and water efficiency
such as windows, mechanical systems and plumbing fixtures.

MR-1.3
Extend the life cycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural resources, reduce waste and
reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Use existing interior non-structural elements (interior walls, doors, floor coverings and ceiling systems) in at least
50% (by area) of the completed building (including additions). If the project includes an addition to an existing
building, this credit is not applicable if the square footage of the addition is more than 2 times the square
footage of the existing building.
Consider reuse of existing buildings, including structure, envelope and interior non-structural elements. Remove
elements that pose contamination risk to building occupants and upgrade components that would improve energy
and water efficiency, such as mechanical systems and plumbing fixtures. Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-2.1
Divert construction, demolition and land-clearing debris from disposal in landfills and incinerators. Redirect recyclable
recovered resources back to the manufacturing process. Redirect reusable materials to appropriate sites.
Recycle and/or salvage at least 50% of non-hazardous construction and demolition debris. Develop and implement
a construction waste management plan that, at a minimum, identifies the materials to be diverted from disposal
and whether the materials will be sorted on-site or co-mingled. Excavated soil and land-clearing debris do not
contribute to this credit. Calculations can be done by weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout.
Establish goals for diversion from disposal in landfills and incinerators and adopt a construction waste management
plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling cardboard, metal, brick, acoustical tile, concrete, plastic,
clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard, carpet and insulation. Designate a specific area(s) on the construction
site for segregated or comingled collection of recyclable materials, and track recycling efforts throughout the
construction process. Identify construction haulers and recyclers to handle the designated materials. Note that
diversion may include donation of materials to charitable organizations and salvage of materials on-site.

MR-2.2
Divert construction and demolition debris from disposal in landfills and incinerators. Redirect recyclable recovered
resources back to the manufacturing process. Redirect reusable materials to appropriate sites.
Recycle and/or salvage an additional 25% beyond MR Credit 2.1 (75% total) of non-hazardous construction
and demolition debris. Excavated soil and land-clearing debris do not contribute to this credit. Calculations
can be done by weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout.
Establish goals for diversion from disposal in landfills and incinerators and adopt a construction waste management
plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling cardboard, metal, brick, acoustical tile, concrete, plastic,
clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard, carpet and insulation. Designate a specific area(s) on the construction
site for segregated or commingled collection of recyclable materials, and track recycling efforts throughout the
construction process. Identify construction haulers and recyclers to handle the designated materials. Note that
diversion may include donation of materials to charitable organizations and salvage of materials on-site.

MR-3.1
Reuse building materials and products in order to reduce demand for virgin materials and to reduce waste, thereby
reducing impacts associated with the extraction and processing of virgin resources.
Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials such that the sum of these materials constitutes at least 5%, based
on cost, of the total value of materials on the project.
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators and equipment shall not
be included in this calculation. Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be
included, providing it is included consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvaged materials into building design and research potential material
suppliers. Consider salvaged materials such as beams and posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry
and furniture, brick and decorative items.

MR-3.2
Reuse building materials and products in order to reduce demand for virgin materials and to reduce waste, thereby
reducing impacts associated with the extraction and processing of virgin resources.
Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials for an additional 5% beyond MR Credit 3.1 (10% total, based
on cost).
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators and equipment shall not
be included in this calculation. Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be
included, providing it is included consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvaged materials into building design and research potential material
suppliers. Consider salvaged materials such as beams and posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry
and furniture, brick and decorative items.

MR-4.1
Increase demand for building products that incorporate recycled content materials, thereby reducing impacts
resulting from extraction and processing of virgin materials.
Use materials with recycled content such that the sum of post-consumer recycled content plus one-half of the
pre-consumer content constitutes at least 10% (based on cost) of the total value of the materials in the project.
The recycled content value of a material assembly shall be determined by weight. The recycled fraction of the
assembly is then multiplied by the cost of assembly to determine the recycled content value.
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators shall not be included
in this calculation. Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included,
providing it is included consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Recycled content shall be defined in accordance with the International Organization of Standards document,
ISO 14021—Environmental labels and declarations—Self-declared environmental claims (Type II environmental
labeling).
Post-consumer material is defined as waste material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and
institutional facilities in their role as end-users of the product, which can no longer be used for its intended
purpose.
Pre-consumer material is defined as material diverted from the waste stream during the manufacturing process.
Excluded is reutilization of materials such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in a process and capable of being
reclaimed within the same process that generated it.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials and identify material suppliers that can achieve this goal.
During construction, ensure that the specified recycled content materials are installed. Consider a range of
environmental, economic and performance attributes when selecting products and materials.

MR-4.2
Increase demand for building products that incorporate recycled content materials, thereby reducing the impacts
resulting from extraction and processing of virgin materials.
Use materials with recycled content such that the sum of post-consumer recycled content plus one-half of the
pre-consumer content constitutes an additional 10% beyond MR Credit 4.1 (total of 20%, based on cost) of
the total value of the materials in the project.
The recycled content value of a material assembly shall be determined by weight. The recycled fraction of the
assembly is then multiplied by the cost of assembly to determine the recycled content value.
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators shall not be included
in this calculation. Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included,
providing it is included consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Recycled content shall be defined in accordance with the International Organization of Standards document,
ISO 14021—Environmental labels and declarations—Self-declared environmental claims (Type II environmental
labeling).
Post-consumer material is defined as waste material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and
institutional facilities in their role as end-users of the product, which can no longer be used for its intended
purpose.
Pre-consumer material is defined as material diverted from the waste stream during the manufacturing process.
Excluded is reutilization of materials such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in a process and capable of being
reclaimed within the same process that generated it.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials and identify material suppliers that can achieve this goal.
During construction, ensure that the specified recycled content materials are installed. Consider a range of
environmental, economic and performance attributes when selecting products and materials.

MR-5.1
Increase demand for building materials and products that are extracted and manufactured within the region,
thereby supporting the use of indigenous resources and reducing the environmental impacts resulting from
transportation.
Use building materials or products that have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as manufactured,
within 500 miles of the project site for a minimum of 10% (based on cost) of the total materials value. If only
a fraction of a product or material is extracted/harvested/recovered and manufactured locally, then only that
percentage (by weight) shall contribute to the regional value.
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators and equipment shall not
be included in this calculation. Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be
included, providing it is included consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials, and identify materials and material suppliers that can achieve
this goal. During construction, ensure that the specified local materials are installed and quantify the total percentage
of local materials installed. Consider a range of environmental, economic and performance attributes
when selecting products and materials.

MR-5.2
Increase demand for building materials and products that are extracted and manufactured within the region,
thereby supporting the use of indigenous resources and reducing the environmental impacts resulting from
transportation.
Use building materials or products that have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as manufactured,
within 500 miles of the project site for an additional 10% beyond MR Credit 5.1 (total of 20%, based on cost)
of the total materials value. If only a fraction of the material is extracted/harvested/recovered and manufactured
locally, then only that percentage (by weight) shall contribute to the regional value.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials and identify materials and material suppliers that can achieve
this goal. During construction, ensure that the specified local materials are installed. Consider a range of environmental,
economic and performance attributes when selecting products and materials.

MR-6
Reduce the use and depletion of finite raw materials and long-cycle renewable materials by replacing them with
rapidly renewable materials.
Use rapidly renewable building materials and products (made from plants that are typically harvested within a
ten-year cycle or shorter) for 2.5% of the total value of all building materials and products used in the project,
based on cost.
Establish a project goal for rapidly renewable materials and identify products and suppliers that can support
achievement of this goal. Consider materials such as bamboo, wool, cotton insulation, agrifiber, linoleum, wheatboard,
strawboard and cork. During construction, ensure that the specified renewable materials are installed.

MR-7
Encourage environmentally responsible forest management.
Use a minimum of 50% of wood-based materials and products, which are certified in accordance with the Forest
Stewardship Council’s (FSC) Principles and Criteria, for wood building components. These components include,
but are not limited to, structural framing and general dimensional framing, flooring, sub-flooring, wood doors
and finishes.
Only include materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included, providing it is included
consistently in MR Credits 3–7.
Establish a project goal for FSC-certified wood products and identify suppliers that can achieve this goal. During
construction, ensure that the FSC-certified wood products are installed and quantify the total percentage of
FSC-certified wood products installed.

EQ-1
Provide capacity for ventilation system monitoring to help sustain occupant comfort and well-being.
Install permanent monitoring systems that provide feedback on ventilation system performance to ensure that
ventilation systems maintain design minimum ventilation requirements. Configure all monitoring equipment
to generate an alarm when the conditions vary by 10% or more from setpoint, via either a building automation
system alarm to the building operator or via a visual or audible alert to the building occupants.
FOR MECHANICALLY VENTILATED SPACES
❑ Monitor carbon dioxide concentrations within all densely occupied spaces (those with a design occupant
density greater than or equal to 25 people per 1000 sq.ft.). CO2 monitoring locations shall be between 3
feet and 6 feet above the floor.
❑ For each mechanical ventilation system serving non-densely occupied spaces, provide a direct outdoor airflow
measurement device capable of measuring the minimum outdoor airflow rate with an accuracy of plus or
minus 15% of the design minimum outdoor air rate, as defined by ASHRAE 62.1-2004.
FOR NATURALLY VENTILATED SPACES
Monitor CO2 concentrations within all naturally ventilated spaces. CO2 monitoring shall be located within
the room between 3 feet and 6 feet above the floor. One CO2 sensor may be used to represent multiple spaces if
the natural ventilation design uses passive stack(s) or other means to induce airflow through those spaces equally
and simultaneously without intervention by building occupants.
Install carbon dioxide and airflow measurement equipment and feed the information to the HVAC system and/or
Building Automation System (BAS) to trigger corrective action, if applicable. If such automatic controls are
not feasible with the building systems, use the measurement equipment to trigger alarms that inform building
operators or occupants of a possible deficiency in outdoor air delivery.

EQ-2
Provide additional outdoor air ventilation to improve indoor air quality for improved occupant comfort, wellbeing
and productivity.
FOR MECHANICALLY VENTILATED SPACES
❑ Increase breathing zone outdoor air ventilation rates to all occupied spaces by at least 30% above the minimum
rates required by ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2004 as determined by EQ Prerequisite 1.
FOR NATURALLY VENTILATED SPACES
Design natural ventilation systems for occupied spaces to meet the recommendations set forth in the Carbon Trust
“Good Practice Guide 237” [1998]. Determine that natural ventilation is an effective strategy for the project
by following the flow diagram process shown in Figure 1.18 of the Chartered Institution of Building Services
Engineers (CIBSE) Applications Manual 10: 2005, Natural ventilation in non-domestic buildings.
AND
❑ Use diagrams and calculations to show that the design of the natural ventilation systems meets the recommendations
set forth in the CIBSE Applications Manual 10: 2005, Natural ventilation in non-domestic
buildings.
OR
❑ Use a macroscopic, multi-zone, analytic model to predict that room-by-room airflows will effectively naturally
ventilate, defined as providing the minimum ventilation rates required by ASHRAE 62.1-2004 Chapter 6,
for at least 90% of occupied spaces.
For Mechanically ventilated Spaces: Use heat recovery, where appropriate, to minimize the additional energy
consumption associated with higher ventilation rates.
For Naturally ventilated Spaces: Follow the eight design steps described in the Carbon Trust Good Practice Guide
237 – 1) Develop design requirements, 2) Plan airflow paths, 3) Identify building uses and features that might
require special attention, 4) Determine ventilation requirements, 5) Estimate external driving pressures, 6) Select
types of ventilation devices, 7) Size ventilation devices, 8) Analyze the design. Use public domain software such
as NIST’s CONTAM, Multizone Modeling Software, along with LoopDA, Natural Ventilation Sizing Tool, to
analytically predict room-by-room airflows.

EQ-3.1
Reduce indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction/renovation process in order to help sustain
the comfort and well-being of construction workers and building occupants.
Develop and implement an Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan for the construction and pre-occupancy
phases of the building as follows:
❑ During construction meet or exceed the recommended Control Measures of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning
National Contractors Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guidelines for Occupied Buildings under
Construction, 1995, Chapter 3.
❑ Protect stored on-site or installed absorptive materials from moisture damage.
❑ If permanently installed air handlers are used during construction, filtration media with a Minimum Efficiency
Reporting Value (MERV) of 8 shall be used at each return air grille, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2-1999.
Replace all filtration media immediately prior to occupancy.
Adopt an IAQ management plan to protect the HVAC system during construction, control pollutant sources and
interrupt contamination pathways. Sequence the installation of materials to avoid contamination of absorptive
materials such as insulation, carpeting, ceiling tile and gypsum wallboard. Coordinate with Indoor Environmental
Quality Credits 3.2 and 5 to determine the appropriate specifications and schedules for filtration media.
If possible, avoid using permanently installed air handlers for temporary heating/cooling during construction.
Consult the LEED for New Construction v2.2 Reference Guide for more detailed information on how to ensure
the well-being of construction workers and building occupants if permanently installed air handlers must be
used during construction.

EQ-3.2
Reduce indoor air quality problems resulting from the construction/renovation process in order to help sustain
the comfort and well-being of construction workers and building occupants.
Develop and implement an Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Management Plan for the pre-occupancy phase as follows:
OPTION 1 — Flush-Out
❑ After construction ends, prior to occupancy and with all interior finishes installed, perform a building flushout
by supplying a total air volume of 14,000 cu.ft. of outdoor air per sq.ft. of floor area while maintaining
an internal temperature of at least 60 degrees F and relative humidity no higher than 60%.
OR
❑ If occupancy is desired prior to completion of the flush-out, the space may be occupied following delivery
of a minimum of 3,500 cu.ft. of outdoor air per sq.ft. of floor area to the space. Once a space is occupied, it
shall be ventilated at a minimum rate of 0.30 cfm/sq.ft. of outside air or the design minimum outside air rate
determined in EQ Prerequisite 1, whichever is greater. During each day of the flush-out period, ventilation
shall begin a minimum of three hours prior to occupancy and continue during occupancy. These conditions
shall be maintained until a total of 14,000 cu.ft./sq.ft. of outside air has been delivered to the space.
OR
OPTION 2 — Air Testing
❑ Conduct baseline IAQ testing, after construction ends and prior to occupancy, using testing protocols consistent
with the United States Environmental Protection Agency Compendium of Methods for the Determination
of Air Pollutants in Indoor Air and as additionally detailed in the Reference Guide.
❑ Demonstrate that the contaminant maximum concentrations listed below are not exceeded.
Contaminant Maximum Concentration
Formaldehyde 50 parts per billion
Particulates (PM10) 50 micrograms per cubic meter
Total Volatile Organic Compunds (TVOC) 500 micrograms per cubic meter
* 4-Phenylcyclohexene (4-PCH) 6.5 micrograms per cubic meter
Carbon Monoxide (CO) 9 part per million and no greater than 2 parts per million above
outdoor levels
* This test is only required if carpets and fabrics with styrene butadiene rubber (SBR) latex backing material are installed as
part of the base building systems.
❑ For each sampling point where the maximum concentration limits are exceeded conduct additional flushout
with outside air and retest the specific parameter(s) exceeded to indicate the requirements are achieved.
Repeat procedure until all requirements have been met. When retesting non-complying building areas, take
samples from the same locations as in the first test.
❑ The air sample testing shall be conducted as follows:
1) All measurements shall be conducted prior to occupancy, but during normal occupied hours, and with the
building ventilation system starting at the normal daily start time and operated at the minimum outside
air flow rate for the occupied mode throughout the duration of the air testing.
2) The building shall have all interior finishes installed, including but not limited to millwork, doors, paint,
carpet and acoustic tiles. Non-fixed furnishings such as workstations and partitions are encouraged, but
not required, to be in place for the testing.
3) The number of sampling locations will vary depending upon the size of the building and number of ventilation
systems. For each portion of the building served by a separate ventilation system, the number of
sampling points shall not be less than one per 25,000 sq.ft., or for each contiguous floor area, whichever
is larger, and include areas with the least ventilation and greatest presumed source strength.
4) Air samples shall be collected between 3 feet and 6 feet from the floor to represent the breathing zone of
occupants, and over a minimum 4-hour period.
Prior to occupancy, perform a building flush-out or test the air contaminant levels in the building. The flush-out
is often used where occupancy is not required immediately upon substantial completion of construction. IAQ
testing can minimize schedule impacts but may be more costly. Coordinate with Indoor Environmental Quality
Credits 3.1 and 5 to determine the appropriate specifications and schedules for filtration media.

EQ-4.1
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
All adhesives and sealants used on the interior of the building (defined as inside of the weatherproofing system
and applied on-site) shall comply with the requirements of the following reference standards:
❑ Adhesives, Sealants and Sealant Primers: South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule
#1168. VOC limits are listed in the table below and correspond to an effective date of July 1, 2005 and rule
amendment date of January 7, 2005.
Architectural Applications VOC Limit Specialty Applications VOC Limit
[g/L less water] [g/L less water]
Indoor Carpet Adhesives 50 PVC Welding 510
Carpet Pad Adhesives 50 CPVC Welding 490
Wood Flooring Adhesives 100 ABS Welding 325
Rubber Floor Adhesives 60 Plastic Cement Welding 250
Subfloor Adhesives 50 Adhesive Primer for Plastic 550
Ceramic Tile Adhesives 65 Contact Adhesive 80
VCT & Asphalt Adhesives 50 Special Purpose Contact Adhesive 250
Drywall & Panel Adhesives 50 Structural Wood Member Adhesive 140
Cove Base Adhesives 50 Sheet Applied Rubber Lining Operations 850
Multipurpose Construction Adhesives 70 Top & Trim Adhesive 250
Structural Glazing Adhesives 100
Substrate Specific Applications VOC Limit Sealants VOC Limit
[g/L less water] [g/L less water]
Metal to Metal 30 Architectural 250
Plastic Foams 50 Nonmembrane Roof 300
Porous Material (except wood) 50 Roadway 250
Wood 30 Single-Ply Roof Membrane 450
Fiberglass 80 Other 420
Sealant Primers VOC Limit
[g/L less water]
Architectural Non Porous 250
Architectural Porous 775
Other 750
Aerosol Adhesives: VOC Weight [g/L minus water]
General purpose mist spray 65% VOCs by weight
General purpose web spray 55% VOCs by weight
Special purpose aerosol adhesives (all types) 70% VOCs by weight
Specify low-VOC materials in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits are clearly stated in each section
of the specifications where adhesives and sealants are addressed. Common products to evaluate include: general
construction adhesives, flooring adhesives, fire-stopping sealants, caulking, duct sealants, plumbing adhesives,
and cove base adhesives.

EQ-4.2
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
Paints and coatings used on the interior of the building (defined as inside of the weatherproofing system and
applied on-site) shall comply with the following criteria:
❑ Architectural paints, coatings and primers applied to interior walls and ceilings: Do not exceed the VOC
content limits established in Green Seal Standard GS-11, Paints, First Edition, May 20, 1993.
 Flats: 50 g/L
 Non-Flats: 150 g/L
❑ Anti-corrosive and anti-rust paints applied to interior ferrous metal substrates: Do not exceed the VOC
content limit of 250 g/L established in Green Seal Standard GC-03, Anti-Corrosive Paints, Second Edition,
January 7, 1997.
❑ Clear wood finishes, floor coatings, stains, and shellacs applied to interior elements: Do not exceed the VOC
content limits established in South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule 1113, Architectural
Coatings, rules in effect on January 1, 2004.
 Clear wood finishes: varnish 350 g/L; lacquer 550 g/L
 Floor coatings: 100 g/L
 Sealers: waterproofing sealers 250 g/L; sanding sealers 275 g/L; all other sealers 200 g/L
 Shellacs: Clear 730 g/L; pigmented 550 g/L
 Stains: 250 g/L
Specify low-VOC paints and coatings in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits are clearly stated in
each section of the specifications where paints and coatings are addressed. Track the VOC content of all interior
paints and coatings during construction.

EQ-4.3
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
All carpet installed in the building interior shall meet the testing and product requirements of the Carpet and
Rug Institute’s Green Label Plus program.
All carpet cushion installed in the building interior shall meet the requirements of the Carpet and Rug Institute
Green Label program.
All carpet adhesive shall meet the requirements of EQ Credit 4.1: VOC limit of 50 g/L.
Clearly specify requirements for product testing and/or certification in the construction documents. Select
products that are either certified under the Green Label Plus program or for which testing has been done by
qualified independent laboratories in accordance with the appropriate requirements.
The Green Label Plus program for carpets and its associated VOC emission criteria in micrograms per square
meter per hour, along with information on testing method and sample collection developed by the Carpet & Rug
Institute (CRI) in coordination with California’s Sustainable Building Task Force and the California Department
of Health Services (DHS), are described in Section 9, Acceptable Emissions Testing for Carpet, DHS Standard
Practice CA/DHS/EHLB/R-174, dated 07/15/04. This document is available at: www.dhs.ca.gov/ps/deodc/ehlb/
iaq/VOCS/Section01350_7_15_2004_FINAL_PLUS_ADDENDUM-2004-01.pdf. (also published as Section
01350 Section 9 [dated 2004] by the Collaborative for High Performance Schools [www.chps.net]).

EQ-4.4
Reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
Composite wood and agrifiber products used on the interior of the building (defined as inside of the weatherproofing
system) shall contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins. Laminating adhesives used to fabricate on-site
and shop-applied composite wood and agrifiber assemblies shall contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins.
Composite wood and agrifiber products are defined as: particleboard, medium density fiberboard (MDF), plywood,
wheatboard, strawboard, panel substrates and door cores. Materials considered fit-out, furniture, and
equipment (FF&E) are not considered base building elements and are not included.
Specify wood and agrifiber products that contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins. Specify laminating adhesives
for field and shop applied assemblies that contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins.

EQ-5
Minimize exposure of building occupants to potentially hazardous particulates and chemical pollutants.
Design to minimize and control pollutant entry into buildings and later cross-contamination of regularly occupied
areas:
❑ Employ permanent entryway systems at least six feet long in the primary direction of travel to capture dirt
and particulates from entering the building at all entryways that are directly connected to the outdoors.
Acceptable entryway systems include permanently installed grates, grilles, or slotted systems that allow for
cleaning underneath. Roll-out mats are only acceptable when maintained on a weekly basis by a contracted
service organization. Qualifying entryways are those that serve as regular entry points for building users.
❑ Where hazardous gases or chemicals may be present or used (including garages, housekeeping/laundry areas
and copying/printing rooms), exhaust each space sufficiently to create negative pressure with respect to
adjacent spaces with the doors to the room closed. For each of these spaces, provide self-closing doors and
deck to deck partitions or a hard lid ceiling. The exhaust rate shall be at least 0.50 cfm/sq.ft., with no air recirculation.
The pressure differential with the surrounding spaces shall be at least 5 Pa (0.02 inches of water
gauge) on average and 1 Pa (0.004 inches of water) at a minimum when the doors to the rooms are closed.
❑ In mechanically ventilated buildings, provide regularly occupied areas of the building with air filtration media
prior to occupancy that provides a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 13 or better. Filtration
should be applied to process both return and outside air that is to be delivered as supply air.
Design facility cleaning and maintenance areas with isolated exhaust systems for contaminants. Maintain physical
isolation from the rest of the regularly occupied areas of the building. Install permanent architectural entryway
systems such as grills or grates to prevent occupant-borne contaminants from entering the building. Install highlevel
filtration systems in air handling units processing both return air and outside supply air. Ensure that air
handling units can accommodate required filter sizes and pressure drops.

EQ-6.1
Provide a high level of lighting system control by individual occupants or by specific groups in multi-occupant
spaces (i.e. classrooms or conference areas) to promote the productivity, comfort and well-being of building
occupants.
Provide individual lighting controls for 90% (minimum) of the building occupants to enable adjustments to
suit individual task needs and preferences.
AND
Provide lighting system controllability for all shared multi-occupant spaces to enable lighting adjustment that
meets group needs and preferences.
Design the building with occupant controls for lighting. Strategies to consider include lighting controls and task
lighting. Integrate lighting systems controllability into the overall lighting design, providing ambient and task
lighting while managing the overall energy use of the building.

EQ-6.2
Provide a high level of thermal comfort system control by individual occupants or by specific groups in multioccupant
spaces (i.e. classrooms or conference areas) to promote the productivity, comfort and well-being of
building occupants.
Provide individual comfort controls for 50% (minimum) of the building occupants to enable adjustments to suit
individual task needs and preferences. Operable windows can be used in lieu of comfort controls for occupants
of areas that are 20 feet inside of and 10 feet to either side of the operable part of the window. The areas of operable
window must meet the requirements of ASHRAE 62.1-2004 paragraph 5.1 Natural Ventilation.
AND
Provide comfort system controls for all shared multi-occupant spaces to enable adjustments to suit group needs
and preferences.
Conditions for thermal comfort are described in ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 to include the primary factors
of air temperature, radiant temperature, air speed and humidity. Comfort system control for the purposes of
this credit is defined as the provision of control over at least one of these primary factors in the occupant’s local
environment.
Design the building and systems with comfort controls to allow adjustments to suit individual needs or those
of groups in shared spaces. ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 identifies the factors of thermal comfort and a process
for developing comfort criteria for building spaces that suit the needs of the occupants involved in their daily
activities. Control strategies can be developed to expand on the comfort criteria to allow adjustments to suit
individual needs and preferences. These may involve system designs incorporating operable windows, hybrid
systems integrating operable windows and mechanical systems, or mechanical systems alone. Individual adjustments
may involve individual thermostat controls, local diffusers at floor, desk or overhead levels, or control of
individual radiant panels, or other means integrated into the overall building, thermal comfort systems, and energy
systems design. In addition, designers should evaluate the closely tied interactions between thermal comfort (as
required by ASHRAE Standard 55-2004) and acceptable indoor air quality (as required by ASHRAE Standard
62.1-2004, whether natural or mechanical ventilation).

EQ-7.1
Provide a comfortable thermal environment that supports the productivity and well-being of building occupants.
Design HVAC systems and the building envelope to meet the requirements of ASHRAE Standard 55-2004,
Thermal Comfort Conditions for Human Occupancy. Demonstrate design compliance in accordance with the
Section 6.1.1 Documentation.
Establish comfort criteria per ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 that support the desired quality and occupant satisfaction
with building performance. Design building envelope and systems with the capability to deliver performance
to the comfort criteria under expected environmental and use conditions. Evaluate air temperature, radiant
temperature, air speed, and relative humidity in an integrated fashion and coordinate these criteria with EQ
Prerequisite 1, EQ Credit 1, and EQ Credit 2.

EQ-7.2
Provide for the assessment of building thermal comfort over time.
Agree to implement a thermal comfort survey of building occupants within a period of six to 18 months after
occupancy. This survey should collect anonymous responses about thermal comfort in the building including
an assessment of overall satisfaction with thermal performance and identification of thermal comfort-related
problems. Agree to develop a plan for corrective action if the survey results indicate that more than 20% of occupants
are dissatisfied with thermal comfort in the building. This plan should include measurement of relevant
environmental variables in problem areas in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 55-2004.
ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 provides guidance for establishing thermal comfort criteria and the documentation
and validation of building performance to the criteria. While the standard is not intended for purposes of
continuous monitoring and maintenance of the thermal environment, the principles expressed in the standard
provide a basis for design of monitoring and corrective action systems.

EQ-8.1
Provide for the building occupants a connection between indoor spaces and the outdoors through the introduction
of daylight and views into the regularly occupied areas of the building.
OPTION 1 — CALCULATION
Achieve a minimum glazing factor of 2% in a minimum of 75% of all regularly occupied areas. The glazing
factor is calculated as follows:
Glazing = Window Area [SF] x Window Geometry x Actual Tvis x Window Height
Factor Floor Area [SF] Factor Minimum Tvis Factor
OR
OPTION 2 — SIMULATION
Demonstrate, through computer simulation, that a minimum daylight illumination level of 25 footcandles has
been achieved in a minimum of 75% of all regularly occupied areas. Modeling must demonstrate 25 horizontal
footcandles under clear sky conditions, at noon, on the equinox, at 30 inches above the floor.
OR
OPTION 3 — MEASUREMENT
Demonstrate, through records of indoor light measurements, that a minimum daylight illumination level of 25
footcandles has been achieved in at least 75% of all regularly occupied areas. Measurements must be taken on a
10-foot grid for all occupied spaces and must be recorded on building floor plans.
In all cases, only the square footage associated with the portions of rooms or spaces meeting the minimum illumination
requirements can be applied towards the 75% of total area calculation required to qualify for this
credit.
In all cases, provide daylight redirection and/or glare control devices to avoid high-contrast situations that could
impede visual tasks. Exceptions for areas where tasks would be hindered by the use of daylight will be considered
on their merits.
Design the building to maximize interior daylighting. Strategies to consider include building orientation, shallow
floor plates, increased building perimeter, exterior and interior permanent shading devices, high performance
glazing and automatic photocell-based controls. Predict daylight factors via manual calculations or model daylighting
strategies with a physical or computer model to assess footcandle levels and daylight factors achieved.

EQ-8.2
Provide for the building occupants a connection between indoor spaces and the outdoors through the introduction
of daylight and views into the regularly occupied areas of the building.
Achieve direct line of sight to the outdoor environment via vision glazing between 2’6” and 7’6” above finish
floor for building occupants in 90% of all regularly occupied areas. Determine the area with direct line of sight
by totaling the regularly occupied square footage that meets the following criteria:
❑ In plan view, the area is within sight lines drawn from perimeter vision glazing.
❑ In section view, a direct sight line can be drawn from the area to perimeter vision glazing.
Line of sight may be drawn through interior glazing. For private offices, the entire square footage of the office
can be counted if 75% or more of the area has direct line of sight to perimeter vision glazing. For multi-occupant
spaces, the actual square footage with direct line of sight to perimeter vision glazing is counted.
Design the space to maximize daylighting and view opportunities. Strategies to consider include lower partition
heights, interior shading devices, interior glazing, and automatic photocell-based controls

ID-1
To provide design teams and projects the opportunity to be awarded points for exceptional performance above
the requirements set by the LEED for New Construction Green Building Rating System and/or innovative
performance in Green Building categories not specifically addressed by the LEED for New Construction Green
Building Rating System.
Credit 1.1 (1 point) In writing, identify the intent of the proposed innovation credit, the proposed requirement
for compliance, the proposed submittals to demonstrate compliance, and the design approach
(strategies) that might be used to meet the requirements.
Credit 1.2 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
Credit 1.3 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
Credit 1.4 (1 point) Same as Credit 1.1
Substantially exceed a LEED for New Construction performance credit such as energy performance or water
efficiency. Apply strategies or measures that demonstrate a comprehensive approach and quantifiable environment
and/or health benefits.

ID-2
To support and encourage the design integration required by a LEED for New Construction green building
project and to streamline the application and certification process.
At least one principal participant of the project team shall be a LEED Accredited Professional (AP).
Educate the project team members about green building design & construction and application of the LEED
Rating System early in the life of the project. Consider assigning the LEED AP as a facilitator of an integrated
design & construction process.
