SS-1
To avoid the development of inappropriate sites and reduce the environmental impact from the location of a building
on a site.
Do not develop buildings, hardscape, roads or parking areas on portions of sites that meet any of the following
criteria:
n Prime farmland as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in the United States Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 7, Volume 6, Parts 400 to 699, Section 657.5 (citation 7CFR657.5). Projects outside the U.S.
may use a local equivalent.
n Previously undeveloped land whose elevation is lower than 5 feet (1.5 meters) above the elevation of the 100-
year flood as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), an equivalent local regulatory
agency, or a professional hydrologist.
n Land specifically identified as habitat for any species on federal or state threatened or endangered lists.
Projects outside the U.S. may use a local equivalent.
n Land within 100 feet (30 meters) of any wetlands as defined by the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR,
Parts 230-233 and Part 22, or a local equivalent definition outside the U.S., and isolated wetlands or areas of
special concern identified by state or local rule, OR within setback distances from wetlands prescribed in state
or local regulations, as defined by local or state rule or law, whichever is more stringent
n Previously undeveloped land that is within 50 feet (15 meters) of a water body, defined as seas, lakes, rivers,
streams and tributaries that support or could support aquatic life, recreation or industrial use, consistent with
the terminology of the Clean Water Act
n Land that prior to acquisition for the project was public parkland, unless land of equal or greater value as
parkland is accepted in trade by the public landowner (park authority projects and projects which are operated
by and support the function of the park are exempt).
During the site selection process, give preference to sites that do not include sensitive elements or restrictive land
types. Select a suitable building location and design the building with a minimal footprint to minimize disruption of
the environmentally sensitive areas identified above.

SS-2
To channel development to urban areas with existing infrastructure, protect greenfields, and preserve habitat and
natural resources.
OPTION 1. Development Density
Construct or renovate a building on a previously developed site AND in a community with a minimum density
of 60,000 square feet per acre net (13,800 square meters per hectare net). The density calculation is based on a
typical two-story downtown development and must include the area of the project being built.
OR
OPTION 2. Community Connectivity
Construct or renovate a building on a site that meets the following criteria:
n Is located on a previously developed site
n Is within 1/2 mile (800 meters) of a residential area or neighborhood with an average density of 10 units per
acre net (10 units per 0.4 hectare net)
n Is within 1/2 mile (800 meters) of at least 10 basic services
n Has pedestrian access between the building and the services
For mixed-use projects, no more than 1 service within the project boundary may be counted as 1 of the 10 basic
services, provided it is open to the public. No more than 2 of the 10 services required may be anticipated (i.e., at
least 8 must be existing and operational). In addition, the anticipated services must demonstrate that they will be
operational in the locations indicated within 1 year of occupation of the applicant project.
Examples of basic services include the following:
n Bank
n Place of Worship
n Convenience Grocery
n Day Care Center
n Cleaners
n Fire Station
n Beauty Salon
n Hardware
n Laundry
n Library
n Medical or Dental Office
n Senior Care Facility
n Park
n Pharmacy
n Post Office
n Restaurant
n School
n Supermarket
n Theater
n Community Center
n Fitness Center
n Museum
Proximity is determined by drawing a 1/2-mile radius (800-meter) around a main building entrance on a site map
and counting the services within that radius.
 
During the site selection process, give preference to urban sites with pedestrian access to a variety of services.

SS-3
To rehabilitate damaged sites where development is complicated by environmental contamination and to reduce
pressure on undeveloped land.
OPTION 1
Develop on a site documented as contaminated by means of an ASTM E1903-97 Phase II Environmental Site
Assessment, or a local voluntary cleanup program. Projects outside the U.S. may use a local equivalent to ASTM
E1903-97 Phase II Environmental Site Assessment.
OR
OPTION 2
Develop on a site defined as a brownfield by a local, state, tribal or national government agency, whichever is
most stringent.
For projects where asbestos is found and remediated also earn this credit. Testing should be done in accordance with
EPA Reg 40CFR part 763, when applicable.
During the site selection process, give preference to brownfield sites. Identify tax incentives and property cost
savings. Coordinate site development plans with remediation activity, as appropriate.

SS-4.1
To reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
OPTION 1. Rail Station, Bus Rapid Transit Station & Ferry Terminal Proximity
Locate the project within 1/2-mile (800-meter) walking distance (measured from a main building entrance) of an
existing or planned and funded commuter rail, light rail, subway station, bus rapid transit1 station or commuter
ferry terminal.
OR
OPTION 2. Bus Stop Proximity
Locate the project within 1/4-mile (400-meter) walking distance (measured from a main building entrance) of 1 or
more stops for 2 or more public, campus, or private bus lines usable by building occupants.
OR
OPTION 3. Rideshare Proximity
Projects outside the U.S. may locate the project within 1/4-mile (400-meter) walking distance (measured from a
main building entrance) of 1 or more stops for 2 or more existing rideshare options2 that that meet the definition
of public transportation3 and are authorized by the local transit authority if one exists.
Perform a transportation survey of future building occupants to identify transportation needs. Locate the building
near mass transit.

SS-4.2
To reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
CASE 1. Commercial or Institutional Projects
Provide secure bicycle racks and/or storage within 200 yards (200 meters) of a building entrance for 5% or more
of all building users (measured at peak periods)
Provide shower and changing facilities in the building, or within 200 yards (200 meters) of a building entrance,
for 0.5% of full-time equivalent (FTE) occupants.
CASE 2. Residential Projects
Provide covered storage facilities for securing bicycles for 15% or more of building occupants.
Design the building with transportation amenities such as bicycle racks and shower/changing facilities.

SS-4.3
To reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
OPTION 1
Provide preferred parking1 for low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles2 for 5% of the total vehicle parking capacity
of the site.
OR
OPTION 2
Install alternative-fuel fueling stations for 3% of the total vehicle parking capacity of the site. Liquid or gaseous
fueling facilities must be separately ventilated or located outdoors.
OR
OPTION 3
Provide low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles2 for 3% of full-time equivalent (FTE) occupants.
Provide preferred parking1 for these vehicles.
OR
OPTION 4
Provide building occupants access to a low-emitting or fuel-efficient vehicle-sharing program. The following
requirements must be met:
n One low-emitting or fuel-efficient vehicle must be provided per 3% of FTE occupants, assuming that
1 shared vehicle can carry 8 persons (i.e., 1 vehicle per 267 FTE occupants). For buildings with fewer than
267 FTE occupants, at least 1 low emitting or fuel-efficient vehicle must be provided.
n A vehicle-sharing contract must be provided that has an agreement of at least 2 years.
n The estimated number of customers served per vehicle must be supported by documentation.
n A narrative explaining the vehicle-sharing program and its administration must be submitted.
n Parking for low-emitting and fuel-efficient vehicles must be located in the nearest available spaces in the
nearest available parking area. Provide a site plan or area map clearly highlighting the walking path from the
parking area to the project site and noting the distance.
Provide transportation amenities such as alternative-fuel refueling stations. Consider sharing the costs and benefits
of refueling stations with neighbors.

SS-4.4
To reduce pollution and land development impacts from automobile use.
CASE 1. Non-Residential Projects
OPTION 1
Size parking capacity to meet but not exceed minimum local zoning requirements.
Provide preferred parking1 for carpools or vanpools for 5% of the total parking spaces.
OR
OPTION 2
For projects that provide parking for less than 5% of full-time equivalent (FTE) building occupants:
Provide preferred parking1 for carpools or vanpools, marked as such, for 5% of total parking spaces.
OR
OPTION 3
Provide no new parking.
OR
OPTION 4
For projects that have no minimum local zoning requirements, provide 25% fewer parking spaces than the
applicable standard listed in the 2003 Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) “Parking Generation”
study at http://www.ite.org.
CASE 2. Residential Projects
OPTION 1
Size parking capacity to meet but not exceed minimum local zoning requirements.
Provide infrastructure and support programs to facilitate shared vehicle use such as carpool drop-off areas,
designated parking for vanpools, car-share services, ride boards and shuttle services to mass transit.
OR
OPTION 2
Provide no new parking.
CASE 3. Mixed Use (Residential with Commercial/Retail) Projects
OPTION 1
Mixed-use buildings with less than 10% commercial area must be considered residential and adhere to
the residential requirements in Case 2. For mixed-use buildings with more than 10% commercial area, the
commercial space must adhere to non-residential requirements in Case 1 and the residential component
must adhere to residential requirements in Case 2.
OR
OPTION 2
Provide no new parking.
Minimize parking lot/garage size. Consider sharing parking facilities with adjacent buildings. Consider alternatives
that will limit the use of single occupancy vehicles.

SS-5.1
To conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat and promote biodiversity.
CASE 1. Greenfield Sites1
Limit all site disturbance to the following parameters:
n 40 feet (12 meters) beyond the building perimeter and parking garages;
n 10 feet (3 meters) beyond surface walkways, patios, surface parking and utilities less than 12 inches
(30 centimeters) in diameter;
n 15 feet (4.5 meters) beyond primary roadway curbs and main utility branch trenches;
n 25 feet (8 meters) beyond constructed areas with permeable surfaces (such as pervious paving areas,
stormwater detention facilities and playing fields) that require additional staging areas to limit compaction in
the constructed area.
CASE 2. Previously Developed2 Areas or Graded Sites
Restore or protect a minimum of 50% of the site (excluding the building footprint) or 20% of the total site
area (including building footprint), whichever is greater, with native or adapted vegetation3. Projects earning
SS Credit 2: Development Density and Community Connectivity may include vegetated roof surface in this
calculation if the plants are native or adapted, provide habitat, and promote biodiversity.
Projects with limited landscape opportunities may also donate offsite land in perpetuity, equal to 60% of the
previously developed area (including the building footprint), to a land trust within the same EPA Level III
Ecoregion identified for the project site. The land trust must adhere to the Land Trust Alliance ‘Land Trust
Standards and Practices’ 2004 Revision.
Survey greenfield sites to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for developing the project site. Carefully
site the building to minimize disruption to existing ecosystems and design the building to minimize its footprint.
Strategies include stacking the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing parking facilities with neighbors.
Establish clearly-marked construction boundaries to minimize disturbance of the existing site and restore previously
degraded areas to their natural state. For previously developed sites, use local and regional governmental agencies,
consultants, educational facilities and native plant societies as resources for the selection of appropriate native
or adapted plants. Prohibit plants listed as invasive or noxious weed species. Once established, native/adapted
plants require minimal or no irrigation; do not require active maintenance such as mowing or chemical inputs such
as fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides; and provide habitat value and promote biodiversity through avoidance of
monoculture plantings.

SS-5.2
To promote biodiversity by providing a high ratio of open space to development footprint.
CASE 1. Sites with Local Zoning Open Space Requirements
Reduce the development footprint1 and/or provide vegetated open space within the project boundary such that
the amount of open space exceeds local zoning requirements by 25%.
CASE 2. Sites with No Local Zoning Requirements (e.g. some university campuses, military bases)
Provide a vegetated open space area adjacent to the building that is equal in area to the building footprint.
CASE 3. Sites with Zoning Ordinances but No Open Space Requirements
Provide vegetated open space equal to 20% of the project site area.
ALL CASES
For projects in urban areas that earn SS Credit 2: Development Density and Community Connectivity, vegetated
roof areas can contribute to credit compliance.
For projects in urban areas that earn SS Credit 2: Development Density and Community Connectivity,
pedestrian-oriented hardscape areas can contribute to credit compliance. For such projects, a minimum of 25% of
the open space counted must be vegetated.
Wetlands or naturally designed ponds may count as open space and the side slope gradients average 1:4 (vertical:
horizontal) or less and are vegetated.
Perform a site survey to identify site elements and adopt a master plan for developing the project site. Select a
suitable building location and design the building footprint to minimize site disruption. Strategies include stacking
the building program, tuck-under parking and sharing parking facilities with neighbors to maximize the amount of
open space on the site.

SS-6.1
To limit disruption of natural hydrology by reducing impervious cover, increasing on-site infiltration, reducing or
eliminating pollution from stormwater runoff and eliminating contaminants.
OPTION 1. Design Storms
CASE 1. Sites with Existing Imperviousness 50% or Less
PAT H 1
Implement a stormwater management plan that prevents the postdevelopment peak discharge rate and
quantity from exceeding the predevelopment peak discharge rate and quantity for the 1- and 2-year 24-
hour design storms.
OR
PAT H 2
Implement a stormwater management plan that protects receiving stream channels from excessive
erosion. The stormwater management plan must include stream channel protection and quantity control
strategies.
CASE 2. Sites with Existing Imperviousness Greater Than 50%
Implement a stormwater management plan that results in a 25% decrease in the volume of stormwater runoff
from the 2-year 24-hour design storm.
OR
OPTION 2. Percentile Rainfall Events
CASE 1. Non-Zero Lot Line Projects
In a manner best replicating natural site hydrology processes, manage onsite the runoff from the developed
site for the 95th percentile of regional or local rainfall events using Low Impact Development (LID) and
green infrastructure.
Use daily rainfall data and the methodology in the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s
Technical Guidance on Implementing the Stormwater Runoff Requirements for Federal Projects under
Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act to determine the 95th percentile amount.
OR
CASE 2. Zero Lot Line Projects
For zero lot line projects located in urban areas with a minimum density of 1.5 FAR (13,800 square meters per
hectare net), in a manner best replicating natural site hydrology processes, manage onsite the runoff from the
developed site for the 85th percentile of regional or local rainfall events using LID and green infrastructure.
Design the project site to maintain natural stormwater flows by promoting infiltration. Specify vegetated roofs,
pervious paving and other measures to minimize impervious surfaces. Reuse stormwater for non-potable uses such
as landscape irrigation, toilet and urinal flushing, and custodial uses.

SS-6.2
To limit disruption and pollution of natural water flows by managing stormwater runoff.
Implement a stormwater management plan that reduces impervious cover, promotes infiltration and captures and
treats the stormwater runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall using acceptable best management practices
(BMPs).
BMPs used to treat runoff must be capable of removing 80% of the average annual postdevelopment total suspended
solids (TSS) load based on existing monitoring reports. BMPs are considered to meet these criteria if:
n They are designed in accordance with standards and specifications from a state or local program that has
adopted these performance standards,
OR
n There exists infield performance monitoring data demonstrating compliance with the criteria. Data must
conform to accepted protocol (e.g., Technology Acceptance Reciprocity Partnership [TARP], Washington
State Department of Ecology) for BMP monitoring.
Use alternative surfaces (e.g., vegetated roofs, pervious pavement, grid pavers) and nonstructural techniques (e.g.,
rain gardens, vegetated swales, disconnection of imperviousness, rainwater recycling) to reduce imperviousness and
promote infiltration and thereby reduce pollutant loadings.
Use sustainable design strategies (e.g., low-impact development, environmentally sensitive design) to create
integrated natural and mechanical treatment systems such as constructed wetlands, vegetated filters and open
channels to treat stormwater runoff.

SS-7.1
To reduce heat islands to minimize impacts on microclimates and human and wildlife habitats.
OPTION 1
Use any combination of the following strategies for 50% of the site hardscape (including roads, sidewalks,
courtyards and parking lots):
n Provide shade from the existing tree canopy or within 5 years of landscape installation. Landscaping (trees)
must be in place at the time of occupancy.
n Provide shade from structures covered by solar panels that produce energy used to offset some
nonrenewable resource use.
n Provide shade from architectural devices or structures that have a solar reflectance index (SRI) of at least 29.
n Use hardscape materials with an SRI of at least 29.
n Use an open-grid pavement system (at least 50% pervious).
OR
OPTION 2
Place a minimum of 50% of parking spaces under cover. Any roof used to shade or cover parking must have an
SRI of at least 29, be a vegetated green roof or be covered by solar panels that produce energy used to offset some
nonrenewable resource use.
Employ strategies, materials and landscaping techniques that reduce the heat absorption of exterior materials. Use
shade (calculated on June 21, noon solar time) from native or adapted trees and large shrubs, vegetated trellises or
other exterior structures supporting vegetation. Consider using new coatings and integral colorants for asphalt to
achieve light-colored surfaces instead of blacktop. Position photovoltaic cells to shade impervious surfaces.
Consider replacing constructed surfaces (e.g., roof, roads, sidewalks, etc.) with vegetated surfaces such as vegetated
roofs and open grid paving or specify high-albedo materials, such as concrete, to reduce heat absorption.

SS-7.2
To reduce heat islands to minimize impacts on microclimates and human and wildlife habitats.
OPTION 1
Use roofing materials with a solar reflectance index (SRI) equal to or greater than the values in the table below
for a minimum of 75% of the roof surface.
Roofing materials having a lower SRI value than those listed below may be used if the weighted rooftop SRI
average meets the following criteria:
Area Roof Meeting Minimum SRI
————————————————
Total Roof Area
x SRI of Installed Roof
——————————
Required SRI ≥ 75%
Alternatively, the following equation may be used to calculate compliance:
[ Area of
Roof A x SRI of Roof A
———————
Required SRI ] + [ Area of
Roof B x SRI of Roof B
———————
Required SRI ] + ... Total Roof
Area
0.75
Roof Type Slope SRI
Low-sloped roof ≤ 2:12 (15%) 78
Steep-sloped roof > 2:12 (15%) 29
OR
OPTION 2
Install a vegetated roof that covers at least 50% of the roof area.
OR
OPTION 3
Install high-albedo and vegetated roof surfaces that, in combination, meet the following criteria:
Area Roof Meeting Minimum SRI
————————————————
0.75
+ Area of Vegetated Roof
——————————
0.5 ≥ Total Roof Area
Alternatively, a weighted average approach may be used to calculate compliance for multiple materials:
[ Area of
Roof A x SRI of Roof A
———————
Required SRI ] + [ Area of
Roof B x SRI of Roof B
———————
Required SRI ] +
Area of
Vegetated
Roof
———
0.5
Total Roof
Area
0.75
Roof Type Slope SRI
Low-sloped roof ≤ 2:12 (15%) 78
Steep-sloped roof > 2:12 (15%) 29
Consider installing high-albedo and vegetated roofs to reduce heat absorption. Default values will be available in the
LEED Reference Guide for Green Building Design and Construction, 2009 Edition. Product information is available
from the Cool Roof Rating Council Web site at http://www.coolroofs.org/ and the ENERGY STAR® Web site at
http://www.energystar.gov/.

SS-8
To minimize light trespass from the building and site, reduce sky-glow to increase night sky access, improve
nighttime visibility through glare reduction and reduce development impact from lighting on nocturnal
environments.
Project teams must comply with 1 of the 2 options for interior lighting AND the requirement for exterior lighting.
For Interior Lighting
OPTION 1
Reduce the input power (by automatic device) of all nonemergency interior luminaires with a direct line of
sight to any openings in the envelope (translucent or transparent) by at least 50% between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m.
After-hours override may be provided by a manual or occupant-sensing device provided the override lasts no
more than 30 minutes.
OR
OPTION 2
All openings in the envelope (translucent or transparent) with a direct line of sight to any nonemergency
luminaires must have shielding (controlled/closed by automatic device for a resultant transmittance of less
than 10% between 11 p.m. and 5 a.m.).
For Exterior Lighting
Light areas only as required for safety and comfort. Exterior lighting power densities shall not exceed those
specified in ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 with Addenda 1 for the documented lighting zone.
Justification shall be provided for the selected lighting zone. Lighting controls for all exterior lighting shall
comply with section 9.4.1.3 of ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1- 2007, without amendments.
Classify the project under 1 of the following zones, as defined in IESNA RP-33, and follow all the requirements for
that zone:
LZ1: Dark (developed areas within national parks, state parks, forest land and rural areas)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building-mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial
illuminance value no greater than 0.01 horizontal and vertical footcandles (0.1 horizontal and vertical lux) at
the LEED project boundary and beyond. Document that 0% of the total initial designed fixture lumens (sum
total of all fixtures on site) are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down).
LZ2: Low (primarily residential zones, neighborhood business districts, light industrial areas with
limited nighttime use and residential mixed-use areas)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building-mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial
illuminance value no greater than 0.10 horizontal and vertical footcandles (1.0 horizontal and vertical lux)
at the LEED project boundary and no greater than 0.01 horizontal footcandles (0.1 horizontal lux) 10 feet
(3 meters) beyond the LEED project boundary. Document that no more than 2% of the total initial designed
fixture lumens (sum total of all fixtures on site) are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir
(straight down).
LZ3: Medium (all other areas not included in LZ1, LZ2 or LZ4, such as commercial/ industrial, and
high-density residential)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building-mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial
illuminance value no greater than 0.20 horizontal and vertical footcandles (2.0 horizontal and vertical lux)
at the LEED project boundary and no greater than 0.01 horizontal footcandles (0.1 horizontal lux) 15 feet
(4.5 meters) beyond the site. Document that no more than 5% of the total initial designed fixture lumens
(sum total of all fixtures on site) are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down).
LZ4: High2 (high-activity commercial districts in major metropolitan areas)
Design exterior lighting so that all site and building-mounted luminaires produce a maximum initial
illuminance value no greater than 0.60 horizontal and vertical footcandles (6.5 horizontal and vertical lux)
at the LEED project boundary and no greater than 0.01 horizontal footcandles (0.1 horizontal lux) 15 feet
(4.5 meters) beyond the site. Document that no more than 10% of the total initial designed fixture lumens
(sum total of all fixtures on site) are emitted at an angle of 90 degrees or higher from nadir (straight down).
LZ2, LZ3 and LZ4 - For LEED project boundaries that abut public rights-of-way, light trespass requirements
may be met relative to the curb line instead of the LEED project boundary.
For All Zones
Illuminance generated from a single luminaire placed at the intersection of a private vehicular driveway and
public roadway accessing the site is allowed to use the centerline of the public roadway as the LEED project
boundary for a length of 2 times the driveway width centered at the centerline of the driveway.
Adopt site lighting criteria to maintain safe light levels while avoiding off-site lighting and night sky pollution.
Minimize site lighting where possible, and use computer software to model the site lighting. Technologies to
reduce light pollution include full cutoff luminaires, low-reflectance surfaces and low-angle spotlights.

WE-1
To limit or eliminate the use of potable water or other natural surface or subsurface water resources available on or
near the project site for landscape irrigation.
OPTION 1. Reduce by 50% (2 points)
Reduce potable water consumption for irrigation by 50% from a calculated midsummer baseline case or using the
month with the highest irrigation demand.
Reductions must be attributed to any combination of the following items:
n Plant species, density and microclimate factor
n Irrigation efficiency
n Use of captured rainwater
n Use of recycled wastewater
n Use of water treated and conveyed by a public agency specifically for nonpotable uses
Groundwater seepage that is pumped away from the immediate vicinity of building slabs and foundations may be
used for landscape irrigation to meet the intent of this credit. However, the project team must demonstrate that
doing so does not affect site stormwater management systems.
OR
OPTION 2. No Potable Water Use or Irrigation1 (4 points)
Meet the requirements for Option 1.
AND
PAT H 1
Use only captured rainwater, recycled wastewater, recycled graywater or water treated and conveyed by a
public agency specifically for nonpotable uses for irrigation.
OR
PAT H 2
Install landscaping that does not require permanent irrigation systems. Temporary irrigation systems used
for plant establishment are allowed only if removed within a period not to exceed 18 months of installation.
Perform a soil/climate analysis to determine appropriate plant material and design the landscape with native or
adapted plants to reduce or eliminate irrigation requirements. Where irrigation is required, use high-efficiency
equipment and/or climate-based controllers.

WE-2
To reduce wastewater generation and potable water demand while increasing the local aquifer recharge.
OPTION 1
Reduce potable water use for building sewage conveyance by 50% through the use of water-conserving fixtures
(e.g., water closets, urinals) or nonpotable water (e.g., captured rainwater, recycled graywater, on-site or
municipally treated wastewater).
OR
OPTION 2
Treat 50% of wastewater on-site to tertiary standards. Treated water must be infiltrated or used on-site.
Specify high-efficiency fixtures and dry fixtures (e.g., composting toilet systems, nonwater-using urinals) to reduce
wastewater volumes. Consider reusing stormwater or graywater for sewage conveyance or on-site mechanical and/
or natural wastewater treatment systems. Options for on-site wastewater treatment include packaged biological
nutrient removal systems, constructed wetlands and high-efficiency filtration systems.

WE-3
To further increase water efficiency within buildings to reduce the burden on municipal water supply and wastewater
systems.
Employ strategies that in aggregate use less water than the water use baseline calculated for the building (not
including irrigation). The minimum water savings percentage for each point threshold is as follows:
Percentage Reduction Points
30% 2
35% 3
40% 4
Calculate the baseline according to the commercial and/or residential baselines outlined below.1 Calculations are
based on estimated occupant usage and must include only the following fixtures and fixture fittings (as applicable to
the project scope): water closets, urinals, lavatory faucets, showers, kitchen sink faucets and pre-rinse spray valves.
Commercial Fixtures, Fittings, and Appliances Current Baseline (Imperial Units) Current Baseline (Metric units)
Commercial toilets
1.6 gallons per flush (gpf)*
Except blow-out fixtures: 3.5 (gpf)
6 liters per flush (lpf)
Except blow-out fixtures: 13 lpf
Commercial urinals 1.0 (gpf) 4 lpf
Commercial lavatory
(restroom) faucets
2.2 gallons per minute (gpm) at 60 pounds per
square inch (psi), private applications only (hotel
or motel guest rooms, hospital patient rooms)
0.5 (gpm) at 60 (psi)** all others except private
applications
0.25 gallons per cycle for metering faucets
8.5 liters per minute (lpm) at 4 bar (58 psi),
private applications only (hotel or motel guest
rooms, hospital patient rooms)
2.0 lpm at 4 bar (58 psi), all others except
private applications
1 liter per cycle for metering faucets
Showerheads 2.5 (gpm) at 80 (psi) per shower stall **** 9.5 lpm at 5.5 bar (80 psi)
For projects with commercial pre-rinse spray valves, the flow rate must comply with the ASME A112.18.1 standard of 1.6 gpm (6 lpm) or less.
Residential Fixtures, Fittings, and Appliances Current Baseline (Imperial units) Current Baseline (Metric units)
Residential toilets 1.6 (gpf)*** 6.1 liters per flush (lpf)
Residential lavatory (bathroom) faucets
2.2 (gpm) at 60 psi 8.5 lpm at 4 bar (58 psi)
Residential kitchen faucet
Residential showerheads 2.5 (gpm) at 80 (psi) per shower stall**** 9.5 lpm at 5.5 bar (80 psi) per shower stall
Residential Fixtures, Fittings, and Appliances Current Baseline (Imperial units) Current Baseline (Metric units)
* EPAct 1992 standard for toilets applies to both commercial and residential models.
** I n addition to EPAct requirements, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers standard for public lavatory faucets is 0.5 gpm at 60 psi (2.0 lpm at 4 bar (58 psi))
(ASME A112.18.1-2005). This maximum has been incorporated into the national Uniform Plumbing Code and the International Plumbing Code.
*** EPAct 1992 standard for toilets applies to both commercial and residential models.
**** R esidential shower compartment (stall) in dwelling units: The total allowable flow rate from all flowing showerheads at any given time, including rain systems, waterfalls,
bodysprays, bodyspas and jets, must be limited to the allowable showerhead flow rate as specified above (2.5 gpm/9.5 lpm) per shower compartment, where the floor
area of the shower compartment is less than 2,500 square inches (1.5 square meters). For each increment of 2,500 square inches (1.5 square meters) of floor area
thereafter or part thereof, an additional showerhead with total allowable flow rate from all flowing devices equal to or less than the allowable flow rate as specified above
must be allowed. Exception: Showers that emit recirculated nonpotable water originating from within the shower compartment while operating are allowed to exceed the
maximum as long as the total potable water flow does not exceed the flow rate as specified above.
The following fixtures, fittings and appliances are outside the scope of the water use reduction calculation:
n Commercial Steam Cookers
n Commercial Dishwashers
n Automatic Commercial Ice Makers
n Commercial (family-sized) Clothes Washers
n Residential Clothes Washers
n Standard and Compact Residential Dishwashers
Use WaterSense-certified fixtures and fixture fittings where available. Use high-efficiency fixtures (e.g., water closets
and urinals) and dry fixtures, such as toilets attached to composting systems, to reduce the potable water demand.
Consider using alternative on-site sources of water (e.g., rainwater, stormwater, and air conditioner condensate,
graywater) for nonpotable applications (e.g., toilet and urinal flushing, custodial uses). The quality of any alternative
source of water being used must be taken into consideration based on its application or use.

EA-1
To achieve increasing levels of energy performance beyond the prerequisite standard to reduce environmental and
economic impacts associated with excessive energy use.
Select 1 of the 3 compliance path options described below. Project teams documenting achievement using any of the 3
options are assumed to be in compliance with EA Prerequisite 2: Minimum Energy Performance.
OPTION 1. Whole Building Energy Simulation (1–19 points)
Demonstrate a percentage improvement in the proposed building performance rating compared with the
baseline building performance rating. Calculate the baseline building performance according to Appendix G
of ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 (with errata but without addenda1) using a computer simulation
model for the whole building project. Projects outside the U.S. may use a USGBC approved equivalent standard2.
The minimum energy cost savings percentage for each point threshold is as follows:
New Buildings Existing Building Renovations Points
12% 8% 1
14% 10% 2
16% 12% 3
18% 14% 4
20% 16% 5
22% 18% 6
24% 20% 7
26% 22% 8
28% 24% 9
30% 26% 10
32% 28% 11
34% 30% 12
36% 32% 13
38% 34% 14
40% 36% 15
42% 38% 16
44% 40% 17
46% 42% 18
48% 44% 19
Appendix G of Standard 90.1-2007 requires that the energy analysis done for the building performance rating
method include all the energy costs associated with the building project. To achieve points under this credit, the
proposed design must meet the following criteria:
n Compliance with the mandatory provisions (Sections 5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 8.4, 9.4 and 10.4) in Standard 90.1-2007
(with errata but without addenda1) or USGBC approved equivalent.
n Inclusion of all the energy costs within and associated with the building project.
n Comparison against a baseline building that complies with Appendix G of Standard 90.1-2007 (with errata
but without addenda1) or USGBC approved equivalent. The default process energy cost is 25% of the total
energy cost for the baseline building. If the building’s process energy cost is less than 25% of the baseline
building energy cost, the LEED submittal must include documentation substantiating that process energy
inputs are appropriate.
For the purpose of this analysis, process energy is considered to include, but is not limited to, office and general
miscellaneous equipment, computers, elevators and escalators, kitchen cooking and refrigeration, laundry
washing and drying, lighting exempt from the lighting power allowance (e.g., lighting integral to medical
equipment) and other (e.g., waterfall pumps).
Regulated (non-process) energy includes lighting (e.g., for the interior, parking garage, surface parking, façade, or
building grounds, etc. except as noted above), heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) (e.g., for space
heating, space cooling, fans, pumps, toilet exhaust, parking garage ventilation, kitchen hood exhaust, etc.), and
service water heating for domestic or space heating purposes.
For this credit, process loads must be identical for both the baseline building performance rating and the
proposed building performance rating. However, project teams may follow the exceptional calculation method
(ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 G2.5) or USGBC approved equivalent to document measures that
reduce process loads. Documentation of process load energy savings must include a list of the assumptions made
for both the base and proposed design, and theoretical or empirical information supporting these assumptions.
Projects in California may use Title 24-2005, Part 6 in place of ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 for Option 1.
OR
OPTION 2. Prescriptive Compliance Path: ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide (1 point)
Comply with the prescriptive measures of the ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide appropriate to the project
scope, outlined below. Project teams must comply with all applicable criteria as established in the Advanced
Energy Design Guide for the climate zone in which the building is located. Projects outside the U.S. may use
ASHRAE/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 Appendices B and D to determine the appropriate climate zone.
PAT H 1. ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small Office Buildings 2004
The building must meet the following requirements:
n Less than 20,000 square feet (1,800 square meters).
n Office occupancy.
PAT H 2. ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small Retail Buildings 2006
The building must meet the following requirements:
n Less than 20,000 square feet (1,800 square meters).
n Retail occupancy.
PAT H 3. ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small Warehouses and Self Storage
Buildings 2008
The building must meet the following requirements:
n Less than 50,000 square feet (4,600 square meters).
n Warehouse or self-storage occupancy.
OR
OPTION 3. Prescriptive Compliance Path: Advanced Buildings™ Core Performance™ Guide
(1–3 points)
Comply with the prescriptive measures identified in the Advanced Buildings™ Core Performance™ Guide
developed by the New Buildings Institute. The building must meet the following requirements:
n Less than 100,000 square feet (9,300 square meters).
n Comply with Section 1: Design Process Strategies, and Section 2: Core Performance Requirements.
n Health care, warehouse or laboratory projects are ineligible for this path.
Points achieved under Option 3 (1 point):
n 1 point is available for all projects (office, school, public assembly, and retail projects) less than 100,000
square feet (9,300 square meters) that comply with Sections 1 and 2 of the Core Performance Guide.
n Up to 2 additional points are available to projects that implement performance strategies listed in Section 3,
Enhanced Performance. For every 3 strategies implemented from this section, 1 point is available.
n The following strategies are addressed by other aspects of LEED and are not eligible for additional points
under EA Credit 1:
• 3.1 — Cool Roofs
• 3.8 — Night Venting
• 3.13 — Additional Commissioning
Projects outside the U.S. may use ASHRAE/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007 Appendices B and D to
determine the appropriate climate zone.
Design the building envelope and systems to maximize energy performance. Use a computer simulation model to
assess the energy performance and identify the most cost-effective energy efficiency measures. Quantify energy
performance compared with a baseline building.
If local code has demonstrated quantitative and textual equivalence following, at a minimum, the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) standard process for commercial energy code determination, the results of that analysis may be used
to correlate local code performance with ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2007. Details on the DOE process for
commercial energy code determination can be found at http://www.energycodes.gov/implement/determinations_
com.stm.

EA-2
To encourage and recognize increasing levels of on-site renewable energy self-supply to reduce environmental and
economic impacts associated with fossil fuel energy use.
Use on-site renewable energy systems to offset building energy costs. Calculate project performance by expressing
the energy produced by the renewable systems as a percentage of the building’s annual energy cost and use the table
below to determine the number of points achieved.
Use the building annual energy cost calculated in EA Credit 1: Optimize Energy Performance or the U.S. Department
of Energy’s Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) database to determine the estimated
electricity use.
The minimum renewable energy percentage for each point threshold is as follows:
Percentage Renewable Energy Points
1% 1
3% 2
5% 3
7% 4
9% 5
11% 6
13% 7
Assess the project for nonpolluting and renewable energy potential including solar, wind, geothermal, low-impact
hydro, biomass and bio-gas strategies. When applying these strategies, take advantage of net metering with the
local utility.

EA-3
To begin the commissioning process early in the design process and execute additional activities after systems
performance verification is completed.
Implement, or have a contract in place to implement, the following additional commissioning process activities in
addition to the requirements of EA Prerequisite 1: Fundamental Commissioning of Building Energy Systems and in
accordance with the LEED Reference Guide for Green Building Design and Construction, 2009 Edition:
n Prior to the start of the construction documents phase, designate an independent commissioning authority
(CxA) to lead, review and oversee the completion of all commissioning process activities.
• The CxA must have documented commissioning authority experience in at least 2 building projects.
• The individual serving as the CxA:
– Must be independent of the work of design and construction.
– Must not be an employee of the design firm, though he or she may be contracted through them.
– Must not be an employee of, or contracted through, a contractor or construction manager holding
construction contracts.
– May be a qualified employee or consultant of the owner.
• The CxA must report results, findings and recommendations directly to the owner.
n The CxA must conduct, at a minimum, 1 commissioning design review of the owner’s project requirements
basis of design, and design documents prior to the mid-construction documents phase and back-check the
review comments in the subsequent design submission.
n The CxA must review contractor submittals applicable to systems being commissioned for compliance with
the owner’s project requirements and basis of design. This review must be concurrent with the review of the
architect or engineer of record and submitted to the design team and the owner.
n The CxA or other project team members must develop a systems manual that gives future operating staff the
information needed to understand and optimally operate the commissioned systems.
n The CxA or other project team members must verify that the requirements for training operating personnel
and building occupants have been completed.
n The CxA must be involved in reviewing the operation of the building with operations and maintenance
(O&M) staff and occupants within 10 months after substantial completion. A plan for resolving outstanding
commissioning-related issues must be included.
Although it is preferable that the CxA be contracted by the owner, for the enhanced commissioning credit the CxA
may also be contracted through the design firms or construction management firms not holding construction
contracts.
The LEED Reference Guide for Green Building Design and Construction, 2009 Edition provides detailed guidance
on the rigor expected for the following process activities:
n Commissioning design review
n Commissioning submittal review
n Systems manual.

EA-4
To reduce ozone depletion and support early compliance with the Montreal Protocol while minimizing direct
contributions to climate change.
OPTION 1
Do not use refrigerants.
OR
OPTION 2
Select refrigerants and heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVAC&R) equipment that
minimize or eliminate the emission of compounds that contribute to ozone depletion and climate change. The
base building HVAC&R equipment must comply with the following formula, which sets a maximum threshold for
the combined contributions to ozone depletion and global warming potential:
Imperial units
LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 100
Metric units
LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 13
Calculation definitions for LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 100
(Imperial units)
Calculation definitions for LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 13
(Metric units)
LCODP = [ODPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCODP = [ODPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life
LCGWP = [GWPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCGWP = [GWPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life
LCODP: Lifecycle Ozone Depletion Potential
(lb CFC 11/Ton-Year)
LCODP: Lifecycle Ozone Depletion Potential
(kg CFC 11/(kW/year))
LCGWP: Lifecycle Direct Global Warming Potential
(lb CO2/Ton-Year)
LCGWP: Lifecycle Direct Global Warming Potential
(kg CO2/(kW/year))
GWPr: Global Warming Potential of Refrigerant
(0 to 12,000 lb CO2/lbr)
ODPr: Ozone Depletion Potential of Refrigerant
(0 to 0.2 kg CFC 11/kg r)
ODPr: Ozone Depletion Potential of Refrigerant
(0 to 0.2 lb CFC 11/lbr)
GWPr: Global Warming Potential of Refrigerant
(0 to 12,000 kg CO2/kg r)
Lr: Refrigerant Leakage Rate
(0.5% to 2.0%; default of 2% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Lr: Refrigerant Leakage Rate
(0.5% to 2.0%; default of 2% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Mr: End-of-life Refrigerant Loss
(2% to 10%; default of 10% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Mr: End-of-life Refrigerant Loss
(2% to 10%; default of 10% unless otherwise demonstrated)
Rc: Refrigerant Charge
(0.5 to 5.0 lbs of refrigerant per ton of gross ARI rated cooling capacity)
Rc: Refrigerant Charge
(0.065 to 0.65 kg of refrigerant per kW of ARI rated or Eurovent
Certified cooling capacity)
Life: Equipment Life
(10 years; default based on equipment type, unless otherwise
demonstrated)
Life: Equipment Life
(default based on equipment type, unless otherwise demonstrated)
For multiple types of equipment, a weighted average of all base building HVAC&R equipment must be calculated
using the following formula:
Imperial units Metric units
Σ ( LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ) x Qunit
≤ 100
Σ ( LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ) x Qunit
————————————————————————— ≤ 13
Qtotal
————————————————————————
Qtotal
Calculation definitions for
[ Σ (LCGWP + LCODP x 105) x Qunit ] / Qtotal ≤ 100
(Imperial units)
Calculation definitions for
[ Σ (LCGWP + LCODP x 105) x Qunit ] / Qtotal ≤ 13
(Metric units)
Qunit = Gross ARI rated cooling capacity of an individual HVA C or
refrigeration unit (Tons)
Qunit = Eurovent Certified cooling capacity of an individual HVA C or
refrigeration unit (kW)
Qtotal = Total gross ARI rated cooling capacity of all HVA C or
refrigeration
Qtotal = Total Eurovent Certified cooling capacity of all HVA C or
refrigeration (kW)
Small HVAC units (defined as containing less than 0.5 pounds [0.227 kg] of refrigerant) and other equipment,
such as standard refrigerators, small water coolers and any other cooling equipment that contains less than
0.5 pounds (0.227 kg) of refrigerant, are not considered part of the base building system and are not subject to the
requirements of this credit.
Do not operate or install fire suppression systems that contain ozone-depleting substances such as CFCs,
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) or halons.
Design and operate the facility without mechanical cooling and refrigeration equipment. Where mechanical cooling
is used, utilize base building HVAC&R systems for the refrigeration cycle that minimize direct impact on ozone
depletion and global climate change. Select HVAC&R equipment with reduced refrigerant charge and increased
equipment life. Maintain equipment to prevent leakage of refrigerant to the atmosphere. Use fire suppression
systems that do not contain HCFCs or halons.

EA-5
To provide for the ongoing accountability of building energy consumption over time.
OPTION 1
Develop and implement a measurement and verification (M&V) plan consistent with Option D: Calibrated
Simulation (Savings Estimation Method 2) as specified in the International Performance Measurement &
Verification Protocol (IPMVP) Volume III: Concepts and Options for Determining Energy Savings in New
Construction, April 2003.
The M&V period must cover at least 1 year of post-construction occupancy.
Provide a process for corrective action if the results of the M&V plan indicate that energy savings are not being
achieved.
OR
OPTION 2
Develop and implement a measurement and verification (M&V) plan consistent with Option B: Energy
Conservation Measure Isolation, as specified in the International Performance Measurement & Verification
Protocol (IPMVP) Volume III: Concepts and Options for Determining Energy Savings in New Construction,
April 2003.
The M&V period must cover at least 1 year of post-construction occupancy.
Provide a process for corrective action if the results of the M&V plan indicate that energy savings are not
being achieved.
OR
OPTION 3 (1 point)
Meet MPR 6 through compliance Opttion1: Energy and Water Data Release Form. Projects must register an
account in ENERGY STAR’s Portfolio Manager tool and share the project file with the USGBC master account.
Develop an M&V plan to evaluate building and/or energy system performance. Characterize the building and/or
energy systems through energy simulation or engineering analysis. Install the necessary metering equipment to
measure energy use. Track performance by comparing predicted performance to actual performance, broken down
by component or system as appropriate. Evaluate energy efficiency by comparing actual performance to baseline
performance.
While the IPMVP describes specific actions for verifying savings associated with energy conservation measures
(ECMs) and strategies, this LEED credit expands upon typical IPMVP M&V objectives. Measurement & verification
activities should not necessarily be confined to energy systems where ECMs or energy conservation strategies have
been implemented. The IPMVP provides guidance on M&V strategies and their appropriate applications for various
situations. These strategies should be used in conjunction with monitoring and trend logging of significant energy
systems to provide for the ongoing accountability of building energy performance.
For the corrective action process, consider installing diagnostics within the control system to alert the staff when
equipment is not being optimally operated. Conditions that might warrant alarms to alert staff could include:
n Leaking valves in the cooling and heating coils within air handling units;
n Missed economizer opportunities (e.g., faulty economizer damper controls) ;
n Software and manual overrides allowing equipment to operate 24 hours a day/7 days a week;
n Equipment operation during unusual circumstances (e.g., boiler on when outside air temperature is above
65 °F (18°C)).
Besides control diagnostics, consider employing retro-commissioning services or dedicating staff to investigate
increases in energy usage (such a staff member is usually a resource conservation manager — see http://www.energy.
state.or.us/rcm/rcmhm.htm for additional information).

EA-6
To encourage the development and use of grid-source, renewable energy technologies on a net zero pollution basis.
Engage in at least a 2-year renewable energy contract to provide at least 35% of the building’s electricity from
renewable sources, as defined by the Center for Resource Solutions’ Green-e Energy product certification
requirements or an equivalent.
All purchases of green power shall be based on the quantity of energy consumed, not the cost.
If the green power is not Green-e Energy certified, equivalence must exist for both major Green-e Energy program
criteria: 1) current green power performance standards, and 2) independent, third-party verification that those
standards are being met by the green power supplier over time.
OPTION 1. Determine Baseline Electricity Use
Use the annual electricity consumption from the results of EA Credit 1: Optimize Energy Performance.
OR
OPTION 2. Estimate Baseline Electricity Use
Use the U.S. Department of Energy’s Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey (CBECS) database to
determine the estimated electricity use.
Determine the energy needs of the building and investigate opportunities to engage in a green power contract. Green
power is derived from solar, wind, geothermal, biomass or low-impact hydro sources. Visit http://www.green-e.
org/energy for details about the Green-e Energy program. The green power product purchased to comply with
credit requirements need not be Green-e Energy certified. Other sources of green power are eligible if they satisfy
the Green-e Energy program’s technical requirements. Renewable energy certificates (RECs), tradable renewable
certificates (TRCs), green tags and other forms of green power that comply with the technical requirements of the
Green-e Energy program may be used to document compliance with this credit.

MR-1.1
To extend the lifecycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural resources, reduce waste and
reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Maintain the existing building structure (including structural floor and roof decking) and envelope (the exterior skin
and framing, excluding window assemblies and non-structural roofing material). The minimum percentage building
reuse for each point threshold is as follows:
Building Reuse Points
55% 1
75% 2
95% 3
Hazardous materials that are remediated as a part of the project must be excluded from the calculation of the
percentage maintained. If the project includes an addition that is more than 2 times the floor area of the existing
building, this credit is not applicable.
Consider reusing existing, previously-occupied building structures, envelopes and elements. Remove elements that
pose a contamination risk to building occupants and upgrade components that would improve energy and water
efficiency such as windows, mechanical systems and plumbing fixtures.

MR-1.2
To extend the lifecycle of existing building stock, conserve resources, retain cultural resources, reduce waste and
reduce environmental impacts of new buildings as they relate to materials manufacturing and transport.
Use existing interior nonstructural elements (e.g., interior walls, doors, floor coverings and ceiling systems) in at
least 50% (by area) of the completed building, including additions. If the project includes an addition with floor area
more than 2 times the floor area of the existing building, this credit is not applicable.
Consider reusing existing building structures, envelopes and interior nonstructural elements. Remove elements that
pose a contamination risk to building occupants, and upgrade components that would improve energy and water
efficiency such as mechanical systems and plumbing fixtures. Quantify the extent of building reuse.

MR-2
To divert construction and demolition debris from disposal in landfills and incineration facilities. Redirect recyclable
recovered resources back to the manufacturing process and reusable materials to appropriate sites.
Recycle and/or salvage nonhazardous construction and demolition debris. Develop and implement a construction
waste management plan that, at a minimum, identifies the materials to be diverted from disposal and whether the
materials will be sorted on-site or comingled. Excavated soil and land-clearing debris do not contribute to this credit.
Calculations can be done by weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout. The minimum percentage debris
to be recycled or salvaged for each point threshold is as follows:
Recycled or Salvaged Points
50% 1
75% 2
Establish goals for diversion from disposal in landfills and incineration facilities and adopt a construction waste
management plan to achieve these goals. Consider recycling cardboard, metal, brick, mineral fiber panel, concrete,
plastic, clean wood, glass, gypsum wallboard, carpet and insulation. Construction debris processed into a recycled
content commodity that has an open market value (e.g., wood derived fuel [WDF], alternative daily cover material,
etc.) may be applied to the construction waste calculation. Designate a specific area(s) on the construction site for
segregated or comingled collection of recyclable materials, and track recycling efforts throughout the construction
process. Identify construction haulers and recyclers to handle the designated materials. Note that diversion may
include donation of materials to charitable organizations and salvage of materials on-site.

MR-3
To reuse building materials and products to reduce demand for virgin materials and reduce waste, thereby lessening
impacts associated with the extraction and processing of virgin resources.
Use salvaged, refurbished or reused materials, the sum of which constitutes at least 5% or 10%, based on cost, of
the total value of materials on the project. The minimum percentage materials reused for each point threshold is as
follows:
Reused Materials Points
5% 1
10% 2
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators and equipment cannot be
included in this calculation. Include only materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included if
it is included consistently in MR Credit 3: Materials Reuse through MR Credit 7: Certified Wood.
Identify opportunities to incorporate salvaged materials into the building design, and research potential material
suppliers. Consider salvaged materials such as beams and posts, flooring, paneling, doors and frames, cabinetry and
furniture, brick, and decorative items.

MR-4
To increase demand for building products that incorporate recycled content materials, thereby reducing impacts
resulting from extraction and processing of virgin materials.
Use materials with recycled content1 such that the sum of postconsumer2 recycled content plus 1/2 of the
preconsumer3 content constitutes at least 10% or 20%, based on cost, of the total value of the materials in the project.
The minimum percentage materials recycled for each point threshold is as follows:
Recycled Content Points
10% 1
20% 2
The recycled content value of a material assembly is determined by weight. The recycled fraction of the assembly is
then multiplied by the cost of assembly to determine the recycled content value.
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators cannot be included in this
calculation. Include only materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included if it is included
consistently in MR Credit 3: Materials Reuse through MR Credit 7: Certified Wood.
Establish a project goal for recycled content materials, and identify material suppliers that can achieve this goal.
During construction, ensure that the specified recycled content materials are installed. Consider a range of
environmental, economic and performance attributes when selecting products and materials.

MR-5
To increase demand for building materials and products that are extracted and manufactured within the region,
thereby supporting the use of indigenous resources and reducing the environmental impacts resulting from
transportation.
Use building materials or products that have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as manufactured,
within a specified distance of the project site for a minimum of 10% or 20%, based on cost, of the total materials
value. If only a fraction of a product or material is extracted, harvested, or recovered and manufactured locally, then
only that percentage (by weight) can contribute to the regional value. The minimum percentage regional materials
for each point threshold is as follows:
Regional Materials Points
10% 1
20% 2
OPTION 1
All building materials or products have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as manufactured within a
500 mile (800 kilometer) radius of the project site.
OR
OPTION 2
Building materials or products shipped by rail or water have been extracted, harvested or recovered, as well as
manufactured within a 500 mile (800 kilometer) total travel distance of the project site using a weighted average
determined through the following formula:
(Distance by rail/3) + (Distance by inland waterway/2) + (Distance by sea/15) + (Distance by all other means)
≤ 500 miles [800 kilometers]
Mechanical, electrical and plumbing components and specialty items such as elevators and equipment must not be
included in all calculations. Include only materials permanently installed in the project. Furniture may be included if
it is included consistently in MR Credit 3: Materials Reuse through MR Credit 7: Certified Wood.
Establish a project goal for locally sourced materials, and identify materials and material suppliers that can
achieve this goal. During construction, ensure that the specified local materials are installed, and quantify the total
percentage of local materials installed. Consider a range of environmental, economic and performance attributes
when selecting products and materials.

MR-6
To reduce the use and depletion of finite raw materials and long-cycle renewable materials by replacing them with
rapidly renewable materials.
Use rapidly renewable building materials and products for 2.5% of the total value of all building materials and
products used in the project, based on cost. Rapidly renewable building materials and products are made from
agricultural products that are typically harvested within a 10-year or shorter cycle.
Establish a project goal for rapidly renewable materials, and identify products and suppliers that can support
achievement of this goal. Consider materials such as bamboo, wool, cotton insulation, agrifiber, linoleum,
wheatboard, strawboard and cork. During construction, ensure that the specified renewable materials are installed.

MR-7
To encourage environmentally responsible forest management.
Use a minimum of 50% (based on cost) of wood-based materials and products that are certified in accordance with
the Forest Stewardship Council’s principles and criteria, for wood building components. These components include
at a minimum, structural framing and general dimensional framing, flooring, sub-flooring, wood doors and finishes.
Include only materials permanently installed in the project. Wood products purchased for temporary use on the
project (e.g., formwork, bracing, scaffolding, sidewalk protection, and guard rails) may be included in the calculation
at the project team’s discretion. If any such materials are included, all such materials must be included in the
calculation. If such materials are purchased for use on multiple projects, the applicant may include these materials
for only one project, at its discretion. Furniture may be included if it is included consistently in MR Credits 3,
Materials Reuse, through MR Credit 7, Certified Wood.
Establish a project goal for FSC-certified wood products and identify suppliers that can achieve this goal. During
construction, ensure that the FSC-certified wood products are installed and quantify the total percentage of FSCcertified
wood products installed.

IEQ-1
To provide capacity for ventilation system monitoring to help promote occupant comfort and well-being.
Install permanent monitoring systems to ensure that ventilation systems maintain design minimum requirements.
Configure all monitoring equipment to generate an alarm when airflow values or carbon dioxide (CO2) levels vary by
10% or more from the design values via either a building automation system alarm to the building operator or a visual
or audible alert to the building occupants
AND
CASE 1. Mechanically Ventilated Spaces
Monitor CO2 concentrations within all densely occupied spaces i.e., those with a design occupant density of
25 people or more per 1,000 square feet (95 square meters). CO2 monitors must be between 3 and 6 feet (between
1 and 2 meters) above the floor.
Provide a direct outdoor airflow measurement device capable of measuring the minimum outdoor air intake flow
with an accuracy of plus or minus 15% of the design minimum outdoor air rate, based on the value determined in
IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance, for mechanical ventilation systems where 20% or
more of the design supply airflow serves nondensely occupied spaces.
CASE 2. Naturally Ventilated Spaces
Monitor CO2 concentrations within all naturally ventilated spaces. CO2 monitors must be between 3 and 6 feet
feet (between 1 and 2 meters) above the floor. One CO2 sensor may be used to monitor multiple nondensely
occupied spaces if the natural ventilation design uses passive stack(s) or other means to induce airflow through
those spaces equally and simultaneously without intervention by building occupants.
Install CO2 and airflow measurement equipment and feed the information to the heating, ventilating and air
conditioning (HVAC) system and/or building automation system (BAS) to trigger corrective action, if applicable.
If such automatic controls are not feasible with the building systems, use the measurement equipment to trigger
alarms that inform building operators or occupants of a possible deficiency in outdoor air delivery.

IEQ-2
To provide additional outdoor air ventilation to improve indoor air quality (IAQ) and promote occupant comfort,
well-being and productivity.
CASE 1. Mechanically Ventilated Spaces
OPTION 1. ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 or Non-U.S. Equivalent
Increase breathing zone outdoor air ventilation rates to all occupied spaces by at least 30% above the
minimum rates required by ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 (with errata but without addenda1) as determined
by IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance. Projects outside the U.S. may use a local
equivalent to ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 if the same is used for IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum Indoor Air
Quality Performance.
OR
OPTION 2. CEN Standard EN 15251: 2007
Projects outside the U.S. may earn this credit by increasing breathing zone outdoor air ventilation rates to
all occupied spaces by at least 30% above the minimum rates required by Annex B of Comité Européen de
Normalisation (CEN) Standard EN 15251: 2007, Indoor environmental input parameters for design and
assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting
and acoustics as determined by IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance.
CASE 2. Naturally Ventilated Spaces
Determine that natural ventilation is an effective strategy for the project by following the flow diagram process
shown in Figure 2.8 of the CIBSE Applications Manual 10: 2005, Natural Ventilation in Non-domestic Buildings.
AND
OPTION 1. CIBSE or Non-U.S. Equivalent
Show that the natural ventilation systems design meets the recommendations set forth in the CIBSE manuals
appropriate to the project space.
PAT H 1
Use CIBSE Applications Manual 10: 2005, Natural Ventilation in Non-domestic Buildings. Projects
outside the U.S. may use a local equivalent.
OR
PAT H 2
Use CIBSE AM 13:2000, Mixed Mode Ventilation. Projects outside the U.S. may use a local equivalent.
OR
OPTION 2. Airflow Model
Use a macroscopic, multizone, analytic model to predict that room-by-room airflows will effectively naturally
ventilate, defined as providing the minimum ventilation rates required by ASHRAE 62.1-2007 section 6 (with
errata but without addenda1), for at least 90% of occupied spaces. Projects outside the U.S. may use Annex
B of Comité Européen de Normalisation (CEN) Standard EN 15251: 2007 or a local equivalent to section 6 of
ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 to define the minimum ventilation rates.
For mechanically ventilated spaces: Use heat recovery, where appropriate, to minimize the additional energy
consumption associated with higher ventilation rates.
For naturally ventilated spaces, follow the 8 design steps described in the Carbon Trust Good Practice Guide 237:
n Develop design requirements.
n Plan airflow paths.
n Identify building uses and features that might require special attention.
n Determine ventilation requirements.
n Estimate external driving pressures.
n Select types of ventilation devices.
n Size ventilation devices.
n Analyze the design.
Use public domain software such as NIST’s CONTAM, Multizone Modeling Software, along with LoopDA, Natural
Ventilation Sizing Tool, to analytically predict room-by-room airflows.

IEQ-3.1
To reduce indoor air quality (IAQ) problems resulting from construction or renovation and promote the comfort
and well-being of construction workers and building occupants.
Develop and implement an IAQ management plan for the construction and preoccupancy phases of the building as
follows:
n During construction, meet or exceed the recommended control measures of the Sheet Metal and Air
Conditioning National Contractors Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guidelines For Occupied Buildings Under
Construction, 2nd Edition 2007, ANSI/SMACNA 008-2008 (Chapter 3).
n Protect stored on-site and installed absorptive materials from moisture damage.
n If permanently installed air handlers are used during construction, filtration media must be used at each
return air grille that meets one of the following criteria below. Replace all filtration media immediately prior
to occupancy.
• Filtration media with a Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) of 8 as determined by ASHRAE
Standard 52.2-1999 (with errata but without addenda).
• Filtration media is Class F5 or higher, as defined by CEN Standard EN 779-2002, Particulate air filters for
general ventilation, Determination of the filtration performance.
• Filtration media with a minimum dust spot efficiency of 30% or higher and greater than 90% arrestance
on a particle size of 3–10 μg.
Adopt an IAQ management plan to protect the heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) system during
construction, control pollutant sources and interrupt contamination pathways. Sequence the installation of
materials to avoid contamination of absorptive materials, such as insulation, carpeting, ceiling tile and gypsum
wallboard. Coordinate with IEQ Credit 3.2: Construction IAQ Management Plan—Before Occupancy and IEQ
Credit 5: Indoor Chemical & Pollutant Source Control to determine the appropriate specifications and schedules for
filtration media.
If possible, avoid using permanently installed air handlers for temporary heating/cooling during construction.
Consult the LEED Reference Guide for Green Building Design and Construction, 2009 Edition for more detailed
information on how to ensure the well-being of construction workers and building occupants if permanently
installed air handlers must be used during construction.

IEQ-3.2
To reduce indoor air quality (IAQ) problems resulting from construction or renovation to promote the comfort and
well-being of construction workers and building occupants.
Develop an IAQ management plan and implement it after all finishes have been installed and the building has been
completely cleaned before occupancy.
OPTION 1. Flush-Out1
PAT H 1
After construction ends, prior to occupancy and with all interior finishes installed, install new filtration
media and , perform a building flush-out by supplying a total air volume of 14,000 cubic feet of outdoor air per
square foot (4,500 cubic meters of outdoor air per square meter) of floor area while maintaining an internal
temperature of at least 60° F (15°C) and relative humidity no higher than 60%.
OR
PAT H 2
If occupancy is desired prior to completion of the flush-out, the space may be occupied following delivery of
a minimum of 3,500 cubic feet of outdoor air per square foot (1,000 cubic meters of outdoor air per square
meter) of floor area. Once the space is occupied, it must be ventilated at a minimum rate of 0.30 cubic feet
per minute (cfm) per square foot (0.1 cubic meters of outside air per minute per square meter) of outside
air or the design minimum outside air rate determined in IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum Indoor Air Quality
Performance, whichever is greater. During each day of the flush-out period, ventilation must begin a minimum
of 3 hours prior to occupancy and continue during occupancy. These conditions must be maintained until a
total of 14,000 cubic feet per square foot (4,500 cubic meters of outside air per square meter) of outside air has
been delivered to the space.
OR
OPTION 2. Air Testing
Conduct baseline IAQ testing after construction ends and prior to occupancy using testing protocols consistent
with the EPA Compendium of Methods for the Determination of Air Pollutants in Indoor Air or the ISO method
listed in the table below. Testing must be done in accordance with one standard; project teams may not mix
requirements from the EPA Compendium of Methods with ISO.
Demonstrate that the contaminant maximum concentration levels listed below are not exceeded:
Contaminant Maximum Concentration EPA Compendium method ISO method
Formaldehyde 27 parts per billion IP-6 ISO 16000-3
Particulates (PM10) 50 micrograms per cubic meter IP-10 ISO 7708
Total volatile organic compounds (TVOCs) 500 micrograms per cubic meter IP-1 ISO 16000-6
4-Phenylcyclohexene (4-PCH)* 6.5 micrograms per cubic meter IP-1 ISO 16000-6
Carbon monoxide (CO)
9 part per million and no greater than 2 parts
per million above outdoor levels
IP-3 ISO 4224
* This test is only required if carpets and fabrics with styrene butadiene rubber (SBR) latex backing are installed as part of the base building systems.
For each sampling point where the maximum concentration limits are exceeded, conduct an additional flushout
with outside air and retest the noncompliant concentrations. Repeat until all requirements are met. When
retesting noncompliant building areas, take samples from the same locations as in the first test, although it is not
required.
Conduct the air sample testing as follows:
n All measurements must be conducted prior to occupancy, but during normal occupied hours with the
building ventilation system started at the normal daily start time and operated at the minimum outside air
flow rate for the occupied mode throughout the test.
n All interior finishes must be installed, including but not limited to millwork, doors, paint, carpet and
acoustic tiles. Movable furnishings such as workstations and partitions should be in place for the testing,
although it is not required.
n The number of sampling locations will depend on the size of the building and number of ventilation
systems. The number of sampling locations must include the entire building and all representative
situations. Include areas with the least ventilation and greatest presumed source strength.
n Air samples must be collected between 3 and 6 feet (between 1 and 2 meters) from the floor to represent the
breathing zone of occupants, and over a minimum 4-hour period.
Prior to occupancy, perform a building flush-out or test the air contaminant levels in the building. The flush-out
is often used where occupancy is not required immediately upon substantial completion of construction. IAQ
testing can minimize schedule impacts but may be more costly. Coordinate with IEQ Credit 3.1: Construction
IAQ Management Plan—During Construction and IEQ Credit 5: Indoor Chemical & Pollutant Source Control to
determine the appropriate specifications and schedules for filtration media.
The intent of this credit is to eliminate IAQ problems that occur as a result of construction. Architectural finishes
used in tenant build-outs constitute a significant source of air pollutants and must be addressed to qualify for
this credit.

IEQ-4.1
To reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
All adhesives and sealants used on the interior of the building (i.e., inside of the weatherproofing system and applied
on-site) must comply with the following requirements as applicable to the project scope1:
n Adhesives, Sealants and Sealant Primers must comply with South Coast Air Quality Management District
(SCAQMD) Rule #1168. Volatile organic compound (VOC) limits listed in the table below correspond to an
effective date of July 1, 2005 and rule amendment date of January 7, 2005.
Architectural Applications
VOC Limit
(g/L less water)
Specialty Applications
VOC Limit
(g/L less water)
Indoor carpet adhesives 50 PVC welding 510
Carpet pad adhesives 50 CPVC welding 490
Wood flooring adhesives 100 ABS welding 325
Rubber floor adhesives 60 Plastic cement welding 250
Subfloor adhesives 50 Adhesive primer for plastic 550
Ceramic tile adhesives 65 Contact adhesive 80
VCT and asphalt adhesives 50 Special purpose contact adhesive 250
Drywall and panel adhesives 50 Structural wood member adhesive 140
Cove base adhesives 50 Sheet applied rubber lining operations 850
Multipurpose construction adhesives 70 Top and trim adhesive 250
Structural glazing adhesives 100
Substrate Specific Applications
VOC Limit
(g/L less water)
Sealants
VOC Limit
(g/L less water)
Metal to metal 30 Architectural 250
Plastic foams 50 Roadway 250
Porous material (except wood) 50 Other 420
Wood 30
Fiberglass 80
Sealant Primers VOC Limit (g/L less water)
Architectural, nonporous 250
Architectural, porous 775
Other 750
Aerosol Adhesives must comply with Green Seal Standard for Commercial Adhesives GS-36 requirements in
effect on October 19, 2000.
Aerosol Adhesives VOC Limit
General purpose mist spray 65% VOCs by weight
General purpose web spray 55% VOCs by weight
Special purpose aerosol adhesives (all types) 70% VOCs by weight
This table excludes adhesives and sealants integral to the water-proofing system or that are not building
related.
Specify low-VOC materials in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits are clearly stated in each section
of the specifications where adhesives and sealants are addressed. Common products to evaluate include general
construction adhesives, flooring adhesives, fire-stopping sealants, caulking, duct sealants, plumbing adhesives and
cove base adhesives. Review product cut sheets, material safety data (MSD) sheets, signed attestations or other
official literature from the manufacturer clearly identifying the VOC contents or compliance with referenced
standards.

IEQ-4.2
To reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
Paints and coatings used on the interior of the building (i.e., inside of the weatherproofing system and applied onsite)
must comply with the following criteria as applicable to the project scope1:
n Architectural paints and coatings applied to interior walls and ceilings must not exceed the volatile organic
compound (VOC) content limits established in Green Seal Standard GS-11, Paints, 1st Edition, May 20, 1993.
n Anti-corrosive and anti-rust paints applied to interior ferrous metal substrates must not exceed the VOC
content limit of 250 g/L (2 lb/gal) established in Green Seal Standard GC-03, Anti-Corrosive Paints, 2nd
Edition, January 7, 1997.
n Clear wood finishes, floor coatings, stains, primers, sealers, and shellacs applied to interior elements must not
exceed the VOC content limits established in South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule
1113, Architectural Coatings, rules in effect on January 1, 2004.
Specify low-VOC paints and coatings in construction documents. Ensure that VOC limits are clearly stated in each
section of the specifications where paints and coatings are addressed. Track the VOC content of all interior paints
and coatings during construction.

IEQ-4.3
To reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
OPTION 1
All flooring must comply with the following as applicable to the project scope:
n All carpet installed in the building interior must meet one of the following requirements:
• Meets the testing and product requirements of the Carpet and Rug Institute Green Label Plus.
• Maximum VOC concentrations are less than or equal to those specified in the California Department of
Health Services Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from Various Sources
Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers, including 2004 Addenda, using the office scenario as defined
in Table 7.5 within the practice. The additional VOC concentration limits listed in Section 9.1a must also
be met.
• Maximum VOC concentrations meet the California requirements specified above based on the following:
– California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Standard Method V1.1-2010 using test results obtained
at the 14 day time point.
– Projects outside the U.S. may use the German AgBB/DIBt testing method and all testing methods based
on AgBB/DIBt method (GUT, EMICODE, Blue Angel) using test results obtained at the 3 day or 7 day
or 14 day time point. For caprolactam, if test results obtained at the 3 day or 7 day time point is used, the
emission concentration must be less than 1/2 of the concentration limit specified above because the
emission may not have peaked at the measured time points.
If a European testing method (AgBB/DIBt GUT, EMICODE, Blue Angel) had used parameters for
calculating test results different from those specified in the referenced California method, then the
European test results for carpets or floorings need to be converted into California air concentrations by
multiplication with 0.7.
n All carpet cushion installed in the building interior must meet the requirements of the Carpet and Rug
Institute Green Label program.
n All carpet adhesive must meet the requirements of IEQ Credit 4.1: Adhesives and Sealants, which includes a
volatile organic compound (VOC) limit of 50 g/L (0.4 lb/gal).
n All hard surface flooring installed in the building interior must meet one of the following requirements:
• Meet the requirements of the FloorScore standard (current as of the date of this rating system, or more
stringent version) as shown with testing by an independent third-party.
• Demonstrate maximum VOC concentrations less than or equal to those specified in the California
Department of Health Services Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from
Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers, including 2004 Addenda, using the office
scenario as defined in Table 7.5 within the practice.
• Maximum VOC concentrations meet the California requirements specified above based on the following:
– California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Standard Method V1.1-2010 using test results obtained
at the 14 day time point.
– Projects outside the U.S. may use the German AgBB/DIBt testing method and all testing methods based
on AgBB/DIBt method (GUT, EMICODE, Blue Angel) using test results obtained at the 3 day or 7 day
or 14 day time point. For caprolactam, if test results obtained at the 3 day or 7 day time point is used, the
emission concentration must be less than 1/2 of the concentration limit specified above because the
emission may not have peaked at the measured time points.
If a European testing method (AgBB/DIBt GUT, EMICODE, Blue Angel) had used parameters for
calculating test results different from those specified in the referenced California method, then the
European test results for carpets or floorings need to be converted into California air concentrations by
multiplication with 0.7.
• Mineral-based finish flooring products such as tile, masonry, terrazzo, and cut stone without integral
organic-based coatings and sealants and unfinished/untreated solid wood flooring qualify for credit
without any IAQ testing requirements. However, associated site-applied adhesives, grouts, finishes and
sealers must be compliant for a mineral-based or unfinished/untreated solid wood flooring system to
qualify for credit.
n Concrete, wood, bamboo and cork floor finishes such as sealer, stain and finish must meet the requirements of
South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule 1113, Architectural Coatings, rules in effect on
January 1, 2004.
n Tile setting adhesives and grout must meet South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule
1168. VOC limits correspond to an effective date of July 1, 2005 and rule amendment date of January 7, 2005.
n For carpet adhesive, concrete, wood, bamboo and cork floor finishes, and tile setting adhesives, compliance
can be demonstrated with test results of:
• Total volatiles fraction, based on one of the following, provided that water and exempt compounds
are subtracted from total volatiles test results and the mass VOC content is calculated consistent with
SCAQMD Rule 1113 and Rule 1168:
– ASTM D2369
– EPA method 24
– ISO 11890 part 1
• Total volatile organic compounds fraction, based on one of the following, provided that all VOCs with a
boiling point up to 280°C (536°F) are included, and exempt compounds are subtracted from total volatiles
test results and the mass VOC content is calculated consistent with SCAQMD Rule 1113 and Rule 1168:
– ASTM D6886
– ISO 11890 part 2
OR
OPTION 2
All flooring elements installed in the building interior must meet the testing and product requirements of the
California Department of Health Services Standard Practice for the Testing of Volatile Organic Emissions from
Various Sources Using Small-Scale Environmental Chambers, including 2004 Addenda.
Mineral-based finish flooring products such as tile, masonry, terrazzo, and cut stone without integral organicbased
coatings and sealants and unfinished/untreated solid wood flooring qualify for credit without any IAQ
testing requirements. However, associated site-applied adhesives, grouts, finishes and sealers must be compliant
for a mineral-based or unfinished/untreated solid wood flooring system to qualify for credit.
Clearly specify requirements for product testing and/or certification in the construction documents. Select
products that are either certified under the Green Label Plus program or for which testing has been done by qualified
independent laboratories in accordance with the appropriate requirements.

IEQ-4.4
To reduce the quantity of indoor air contaminants that are odorous, irritating and/or harmful to the comfort and
well-being of installers and occupants.
Composite wood and agrifiber products used on the interior of the building (i.e., inside the weatherproofing system)
must contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins. Laminating adhesives used to fabricate on-site and shop-applied
composite wood and agrifiber assemblies must not contain added urea-formaldehyde resins.
Composite wood and agrifiber products are defined as particleboard, medium density fiberboard (MDF), plywood,
wheatboard, strawboard, panel substrates and door cores. Materials considered fixtures, furniture and equipment
(FF&E) are not considered base building elements and are not included.
Specify wood and agrifiber products that contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins. Specify laminating adhesives
for field and shop-applied assemblies that contain no added urea-formaldehyde resins. Review product cut sheets,
material safety data (MSD) sheets, signed attestations or other official literature from the manufacturer.

IEQ-5
To minimize building occupant exposure to potentially hazardous particulates and chemical pollutants.
Design to minimize and control the entry of pollutants into buildings and later cross-contamination of regularly
occupied areas through the following strategies:
n Employ permanent entryway systems at least 10 feet (3 meters) long in the primary direction of travel to
capture dirt and particulates entering the building at regularly used exterior entrances. Acceptable entryway
systems include permanently installed grates, grill s and slotted systems that allow for cleaning underneath.
Roll-out mats are acceptable only when maintained on a weekly basis by a contracted service organization.
n Sufficiently exhaust each space where hazardous gases or chemicals may be present or used (e.g., garages,
housekeeping and laundry areas, copying and printing rooms) to create negative pressure with respect to
adjacent spaces when the doors to the room are closed. For each of these spaces, provide self-closing doors
and deck-to-deck partitions or a hard-lid ceiling. The exhaust rate must be at least 0.50 cubic feet per minute
(cfm) per square foot (0.15 cubic meters per minute per square meter) with no air recirculation. The pressure
differential with the surrounding spaces must be at least 5 Pascals (Pa) (0.02 inches of water gauge) on average
and 1 Pa (0.004 inches of water) at a minimum when the doors to the rooms are closed.
n In mechanically ventilated buildings, each ventilation system that supplies outdoor air shall comply with
the following:
• Particle filters or air cleaning devices shall be provided to clean the outdoor air at any location prior to its
introduction to occupied spaces.
• These filters or devices shall meet one of the following criteria:
– Filtration media is rated a minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) of 13 or higher in accordance
with ASHRAE Standard 52.2.
– Filtration media is Class F7 or higher, as defined by CEN Standard EN 779: 2002, Particulate air filters
for general ventilation, Determination of the filtration performance.
– Filtration media has a minimum dust spot efficiency of 80% or higher and greater than 98% arrestance
on a particle size of 3–10 μg.
• Clean air filtration media shall be installed in all air systems after completion of construction and prior
to occupancy.
Design facility cleaning and maintenance areas with isolated exhaust systems for contaminants. Maintain physical
isolation from the rest of the regularly occupied areas of the building. Install permanent architectural entryway
systems such as grills or grates to prevent occupant-borne contaminants from entering the building. Install highlevel
filtration systems in air handling units processing outside supply air. Ensure that air handling units can
accommodate required filter sizes and pressure drops.

IEQ-6.1
To provide a high level of lighting system control by individual occupants or groups in multi-occupant spaces (e.g.,
classrooms and conference areas) and promote their productivity, comfort and well-being.
Provide individual lighting controls for 90% (minimum) of the building occupants to enable adjustments to suit
individual task needs and preferences
Provide lighting system controls for all shared multi-occupant spaces to enable adjustments that meet group needs
and preferences.
Design the building with occupant controls for lighting. Strategies to consider include lighting controls and task
lighting. Integrate lighting systems controllability into the overall lighting design, providing ambient and task
lighting while managing the overall energy use of the building.

IEQ-6.2
provide a high level of thermal comfort system control1 by individual occupants or groups in multi-occupant
spaces (e.g., classrooms or conference areas) and promote their productivity, comfort and well-being.
Provide individual comfort controls for 50% (minimum) of the building occupants to enable adjustments to meet
individual needs and preferences. Operable windows may be used in lieu of controls for occupants located 20 feet
(6 meters) inside and 10 feet (3 meters) to either side of the operable part of a window. The areas of operable window
must meet the requirements of ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 paragraph 5.1 Natural Ventilation (with errata but
without addenda2).
Provide comfort system controls for all shared multi-occupant spaces to enable adjustments that meet group needs
and preferences.
Conditions for thermal comfort are described in IEQ Credit 7.1: Thermal Comfort—Design and include the primary
factors of air temperature, radiant temperature, air speed and humidity.
Design the building and systems with comfort controls to allow adjustments to suit individual needs or those
of groups in shared spaces. ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 (with errata but without addenda3) identifies the factors
of thermal comfort and a process for developing comfort criteria for building spaces that suit the needs of the
occupants involved in their daily activities. Control strategies can be developed to expand on the comfort criteria
and enable individuals to make adjustments to suit their needs and preferences. These strategies may involve system
designs incorporating operable windows, hybrid systems integrating operable windows and mechanical systems,
or mechanical systems alone. Individual adjustments may involve individual thermostat controls, local diffusers at
floor, desk or overhead levels, control of individual radiant panels or other means integrated into the overall building,
thermal comfort systems and energy systems design. Designers should evaluate the closely tied interactions between
thermal comfort as required by ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 (with errata but without addenda3) and acceptable
indoor air quality as required by ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2007 (with errata but without addenda3), whether natural or
mechanical ventilation.

IEQ-7.1
To provide a comfortable thermal environment that promotes occupant productivity and well-being.
Design heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC) systems and the building envelope to meet the
requirements of one of the options below.
OPTION 1. ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 or Non-U.S. Equivalent
Meet the requirements of ASHRAE Standard 55-2004, Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human
Occupancy (with errata but without addenda37). Demonstrate design compliance in accordance with the Section
6.1.1 documentation. Projects outside the U.S. may use a local equivalent to ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 Thermal
Comfort Conditions for Human Occupancy Section 6.1.1.
OPTION 2. ISO 7730: 2005 & CEN Standard EN 15251: 2007
Projects outside the U.S. may earn this credit by designing heating, ventilating and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems and the building envelope to meet the requirements of International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) 7730: 2005 Ergonomics of the thermal environment, Analytical determination and interpretation
of thermal comfort using calculation of the PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria; and
CEN Standard EN 15251: 2007, Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy
performance of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acoustics.
Establish comfort criteria according to ASHRAE 55-2004 (with errata but without addenda) that support the desired
quality and occupant satisfaction with building performance. Design the building envelope and systems with the
capability to meet the comfort criteria under expected environmental and use conditions. Evaluate air temperature,
radiant temperature, air speed and relative humidity in an integrated fashion, and coordinate these criteria with
IEQ Prerequisite 1: Minimum IAQ Performance, IEQ Credit 1: Outdoor Air Delivery Monitoring, and IEQ Credit 2:
Increased Ventilation.

IEQ-7.2
To provide for the assessment of building occupant thermal comfort over time.
Achieve IEQ Credit 7.1: Thermal Comfort—Design.
Provide a permanent monitoring system to ensure that building performance meets the desired comfort criteria as
determined by IEQ Credit 7.1: Thermal Comfort—Design.
Agree to conduct a thermal comfort survey of building occupants within 6 to 18 months after occupancy. This survey
should collect anonymous responses about thermal comfort in the building, including an assessment of overall
satisfaction with thermal performance and identification of thermal comfort-related problems. Agree to develop a
plan for corrective action if the survey results indicate that more than 20% of occupants are dissatisfied with thermal
comfort in the building. This plan should include measurement of relevant environmental variables in problem areas
in accordance with the standard used for design in IEQ Credit 7.1: Thermal Comfort—Design.
Residential projects are not eligible for this credit.
ASHRAE 55-2004 provides guidance for establishing thermal comfort criteria and documenting and validating
building performance to the criteria. While the standard is not intended for purposes of continuous monitoring and
maintenance of the thermal environment, the principles expressed in the standard provide a basis for the design of
monitoring and corrective action systems.

IEQ-8.1
To provide building occupants with a connection between indoor spaces and the outdoors through the introduction
of daylight and views into the regularly occupied areas of the building.
Through 1 of the 4 options, achieve daylighting in at least the following spaces1:
Regularly
Occupied Spaces
Points
75% 1
OPTION 1. Simulation
Demonstrate through computer simulation that the applicable spaces achieve daylight illuminance levels of
a minimum of 10 footcandles (fc) (110 lux) and a maximum of 500 fc (5,400 lux) in a clear sky condition on
September 21 at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Provide glare control devices to avoid high-contrast situations that could impede visual tasks. However, designs
that incorporate view-preserving automated shades for glare control may demonstrate compliance for only the
minimum 10 fc (110 lux) illuminance level.
OR
OPTION 2. Prescriptive
Use a combination of sidelighting and/or toplighting to achieve a total daylighting zone (the floor area meeting
the following requirements) that is at least 75% of all the regularly occupied spaces.
For sidelighting zones:
n Achieve a value, calculated as the product of the visible light transmittance (VLT) and window-to-floor area
ratio (WFR) of daylight zone between 0.150 and 0.180.
0.150 < VLT x WFR < 0.180
n The window area included in the calculation must be at least 30 inches (0.8 meters) above the floor.
n In section, the ceiling must not obstruct a line that extends from the window-head to a point on the floor
that is located twice the height of the window-head from the exterior wall as measured perpendicular to the
glass (see diagram on the next page).
n Provide glare control devices to avoid high-contrast situations that could impede visual tasks. However,
designs that incorporate view-preserving automated shades for glare control may demonstrate compliance
for only the minimum 0.150 value.
For toplighting zones:
n The toplighting zone under a skylight is the outline of the opening beneath the skylight, plus in each direction
the lesser of (see diagram below):
• 70% of the ceiling height,
• 1/2 the distance to the edge of the nearest skylight,
• The distance to any permanent partition that is closer than 70% of the distance between the top of the
partition and the ceiling.
n Achieve skylight coverage for the applicable space (containing the toplighting zone) between 3% and 6% of the
total floor area.
n The skylight must have a minimum 0.5 VLT.
n A skylight diffuser, if used, must have a measured haze value of greater than 90% when tested according to
ASTM D1003.
OR
OPTION 3. Measurement
Demonstrate through records of indoor light measurements that a minimum daylight illumination level of 10 fc
(110 lux) and a maximum of 500 fc (5,400 lux) has been achieved in applicable spaces. Measurements must be
taken on a 10-foot (3-meter) grid and shall be recorded on building floor plans.
Provide glare control devices to avoid high-contrast situations that could impede visual tasks. However, designs
that incorporate view-preserving automated shades for glare control may demonstrate compliance for only the
minimum 10 fc (110 lux) illuminance level.
OR
OPTION 4. Combination
Any of the above calculation methods may be combined to document the minimum daylight illumination in the
applicable spaces.
 
Design the building to maximize interior daylighting. Strategies to consider include building orientation, shallow
floor plates, increased building perimeter, exterior and interior permanent shading devices, high-performance
glazing, and high-ceiling reflectance values; ly, additionally, automatic photocell-based controls can help to reduce
energy use. Predict daylight factors via manual calculations or model daylighting strategies with a physical or
computer model to assess footcandle (lux) levels and daylight factors achieved.

IEQ-8.2
To provide building occupants a connection to the outdoors through the introduction of daylight and views into the
regularly occupied areas of the building.
Achieve a direct line of sight to the outdoor environment via vision glazing between 30 inches and 90 inches
(between 0.8 meters and 2.3 meters) above the finish floor for building occupants in 90% of all regularly occupied
areas. Determine the area with a direct line of sight by totaling the regularly occupied floor area that meets the
following criteria:
n In plan view, the area is within sight lines drawn from perimeter vision glazing.
n In section view, a direct sight line can be drawn from the area to perimeter vision glazing.
The line of sight may be drawn through interior glazing. For private offices, the entire floor area of the office may be
counted if 75% or more of the area has a direct line of sight to perimeter vision glazing. For multi-occupant spaces, the
actual floor area with a direct line of sight to perimeter vision glazing is counted.
Design the space to maximize daylighting and view opportunities. Strategies to consider include lower partitions,
interior shading devices, interior glazing and automatic photocell-based controls.

ID-1
To provide design teams and projects the opportunity to achieve exceptional performance above the requirements
set by the LEED Green Building Rating System and/or innovative performance in Green Building categories not
specifically addressed by the LEED Green Building Rating System.
Credit can be achieved through any combination of the Innovation in Design and Exemplary Performance paths as
described below:
PAT H 1. Innovation in Design (1-5 points)
Achieve significant, measurable environmental performance using a strategy not addressed in the LEED 2009 for
New Construction and Major Renovations Rating System.
One point is awarded for each innovation achieved. No more than 5 points under IDc1 may be earned through
PATH 1—Innovation in Design.
Identify the following in writing:
n The intent of the proposed innovation credit.
n The proposed requirement for compliance.
n The proposed submittals to demonstrate compliance.
n The design approach (strategies) used to meet the requirements.
PAT H 2. Exemplary Performance (1-3 points)
Achieve exemplary performance in an existing LEED 2009 for New Construction and Major Renovations
prerequisite or credit that allows exemplary performance as specified in the LEED Reference Guide for Green
Building Design & Construction, 2009 Edition. An exemplary performance point may be earned for achieving
double the credit requirements and/or achieving the next incremental percentage threshold of an existing credit
in LEED.
One point is awarded for each exemplary performance achieved. No more than 3 points under IDc1 may be earned
through PATH 2— Exemplary Performance.
PAT H 3. Pilot Credit (1-5 points)
Attempt a pilot credit available in the Pilot Credit Library at www.usgbc.org/pilotcreditlibrary. Register as a pilot
credit participant and complete the required documentation. Projects may pursue up to 5 Pilot Credits total.
Substantially exceed a LEED 2009 for New Construction and Major Renovations performance credit such as energy
performance or water efficiency. Apply strategies or measures that demonstrate a comprehensive approach and
quantifiable environment and/or health benefits.

ID-2
To support and encourage the design integration required by LEED to streamline the application and certification
process.
At least 1 principal participant of the project team shall be a LEED Accredited Professional (AP).
Educate the project team members about green building design and construction, the LEED requirements and
application process early in the life of the project. Consider assigning integrated design and construction process
facilitation to the LEED AP.

RP-1
To provide an incentive for the achievement of credits that address geographically-specific environmental priorities.
Earn 1-4 of the 6 Regional Priority credits identified by the USGBC regional councils and chapters as having
environmental importance for a project’s region. A database of Regional Priority credits and their geographic
applicability is available on the USGBC website, http://www.usgbc.org.
One point is awarded for each Regional Priority credit achieved; no more than 4 credits identified as Regional Priority
credits may be earned. The USGBC has prioritized credits for projects located in the U.S., Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and Guam. All other international projects should check the database for eligible Regional Priority credits.
Determine and pursue the prioritized credits for the project location.