IP-1
To support high-performance, cost-effective project outcomes through an early analysis of the interrelationships among systems.
Beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases, identify and use opportunities to achieve synergies across disciplines and building systems. Use the analyses described below to inform the owner’s project requirements (OPR), basis of design (BOD), design documents, and construction documents.
Discovery:
Energy-Related Systems
Perform a preliminary “simple box” energy modeling analysis before the completion of schematic design that explores how to reduce energy loads in the building and accomplish related sustainability goals by questioning default assumptions. Assess strategies associated with each of the following, as applicable:
 Site conditions. Assess shading, exterior lighting, hardscape, landscaping, and adjacent site conditions.
 Massing and orientation. Assess how massing and orientation affect HVAC sizing, energy consumption, lighting, and renewable energy opportunities.
 Basic envelope attributes. Assess insulation values, window-to-wall ratios, glazing characteristics, shading, and window operability.
 Lighting levels. Assess interior surface reflectance values and lighting levels in occupied spaces.
 Thermal comfort ranges. Assess thermal comfort range options.
 Plug and process load needs. Assess reducing plug and process loads through programmatic solutions (e.g., equipment and purchasing policies, layout options).
 Programmatic and operational parameters. Assess multifunctioning spaces, operating schedules, space allotment per person, teleworking, reduction of building area, and anticipated operations and maintenance.
AND
Water-Related Systems
Perform a preliminary water budget analysis before the completion of schematic design that explores how to reduce potable water loads in the building, reduce the burden on municipal supply or wastewater treatment systems, and accomplish related sustainability goals. Assess and estimate the project’s potential nonpotable water supply sources and water demand volumes, including the following, as applicable:
 Indoor water demand. Assess flow and flush fixture design case demand volumes, calculated in accordance with WE Prerequisite Indoor Water Use Reduction.
 Outdoor water demand. Assess landscape irrigation design case demand volume calculated in accordance with WE Credit Outdoor Water-Use Reduction.
 Process water demand. Assess kitchen, laundry, cooling tower, and other equipment demand volumes, as applicable.
 Supply sources. Assess all potential nonpotable water supply source volumes, such as on-site rainwater and graywater, municipally supplied nonpotable water, and HVAC equipment condensate. Analyze how nonpotable water supply sources can contribute to the water demand components listed above.
Implementation:
Develop a Project Team Letter. Provide a dated letter on the letterhead of the Integrative Process Facilitator that summarizes the team’s integrative process approach and describes the difference that this integrative approach made in terms of improving project team interaction and project performance.
 Describe the approach developed by the project team for engaging a clearly defined and manageable integrative design process beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases.
 The letter must include a separate summary for each issue area analyzed by the project team, describing how the analysis informed the design and building form decisions in the project’s OPR and BOD and the eventual design of the project. Describe the most important goals for each issue area and provide clear guidance on how to evaluate the project’s impact on the selected goals.
The creation of this letter should be a team effort facilitated by the Integrative Process Facilitator. The letter must be signed by all principal project team members and made available to key stakeholders including, but not limited to the owner(s), facility manager(s), tenant(s), and community members. Describe how the letter was distributed to these stakeholders and/or made publicly available.
Exemplary Performance:
Project teams may choose an additional lens through which to demonstrate the outcomes and benefits of an integrative process for an Exemplary Performance point. Optional issue areas to carry out analysis relevant to the project include: site selection, social equity, health & well-being, or another topic not yet addressed.
Site Selection
Before site selection, analyze project goals to identify and select the building site or base building that will provide the most opportunities and fewest barriers for project. Assess at
least two potential locations or base building options, taking into consideration at least the following:
 Building site attributes. Assess the building’s location and site design characteristics.
 Transportation. Assess the tenant occupants’ transportation needs for commuting to and from the site, including convenient access to alternative transportation that meets occupants’ needs.
 Occupant and community well-being. Assess the building’s ability to provide daylight and views, indoor air quality, and other indoor environmental quality characteristics. Identify community assets and the proximity of vulnerable populations surrounding the project. Assess the project’s ability to provide positive social, economic, and environmental benefits for existing community members, as well as any potential negative impacts.
Social Equity
Beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases, review and then complete the LEED Project Team Checklist for Social Impact* in order to assess and select strategies to address issues of inequity within the project and its community, team and supply chain. Through research and consultation with key stakeholders, ensure that all responses within the Checklist are ultimately documented as “Yes” or “No,” and complete all sections for Stakeholders and Goals.
Health & Well-being
Beginning in pre-design and continuing throughout the design phases, use the following steps to inform the design and construction documents:
 Establish health goals. Set clear and specific goals to promote the health of core groups, including:
o Building occupants and users
o Surrounding community
o Supply chain
Develop a statement of health goals for each population, including a summary of how this health goal relates to the highest priority health need for each population.
 Prioritize design strategies. Select specific design and/or programming strategies to address the project’s health goals. This could be accomplished by holding a stand-alone “health charrette” or by integrating health considerations into an existing green charrette.
 Anticipate outcomes. Identify expected impacts on population health behaviors and outcomes associated with the project’s prioritized design strategies.

LT-1
To avoid development on inappropriate sites. To reduce vehicle distance traveled. To enhance livability and improve human health by encouraging daily physical activity.
Locate the project within the boundary of a development certified under LEED for Neighborhood Development (Stage 2 or Stage 3 under the Pilot or v2009 rating systems, Certified Plan or Certified Built Project under the LEED v4 rating system).
Projects attempting this credit are not eligible to earn points under other Location and Transportation credits.
Table 1. Points for LEED ND location.
Certification level
Points BD&C
Points BD&C (Core and Shell)
Points BD&C (Schools)
Points BD&C (Healthcare)
Certified
8
8
8
5
Silver
10
12
10
6
Gold
12
16
12
7
Platinum
16
20
15
9

LT-2
To avoid the development of environmentally sensitive lands and reduce the environmental impact from the location of a building on a site.
Option 1. Previously Developed Land
Locate the development footprint on land that has been previously developed.
OR
Option 2. Avoidance of Sensitive Land
Locate the development footprint on land that does not meet the following criteria for sensitive land:
 Prime farmland. Prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland of statewide or local importance as defined by the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 7, Volume 6, Parts 400 to 699, Section 657.5 (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.) and identified in a state Natural Resources Conservation Service soil survey (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.).
 Floodplains. A flood hazard area shown on a legally adopted flood hazard map or otherwise legally designated by the local jurisdiction or the state. For projects in places without legally adopted flood hazard maps or legal designations, locate on a site that is entirely outside any floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
 Habitat. Land identified as habitat for the following:
o species listed as threatened or endangered under the U.S. Endangered Species Act or the state’s endangered species act, or
o species or ecological communities classified by NatureServe as GH (possibly extinct), G1 (critically imperiled), or G2 (imperiled), or
o species listed as threatened or endangered specifies under local equivalent standards (for projects outside the U.S.) that are not covered by NatureServe data.
 Water bodies. Areas on or within 100 feet (30 meters) of a water body, except for minor improvements.
 Wetlands. Areas on or within 50 feet (15 meters) of a wetland, except for minor improvements.

LT-3
To encourage project location in areas with development constraints and promote the health of the surrounding area.
Option 1. Historic District (1 point BD&C except Core and Shell, 2 points Core and Shell)
Locate the project on an infill location in a historic district.
AND/OR
Option 2. Priority Designation (1 point BD&C except Core and Shell, 2 points Core and Shell)
Locate the project on one of the following:
 a site listed by the EPA National Priorities List;
 a Federal Promise Zone;
 a Qualified Opportunity Zone;
 a Department of the Treasury Community Development Financial Institutions Fund Qualified Low-Income Community (a subset of the New Markets Tax Credit Program);
 a site in a U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Qualified Census Tract (QCT) or Difficult Development Area (DDA); or
 a local equivalent program administered at the national level for projects outside the U.S.
OR
Option 3. Brownfield Remediation (2 points BD&C except Core and Shell, 3 points Core and Shell)
Locate on a brownfield where soil or groundwater contamination has been identified, and where the local, state, or national authority (whichever has jurisdiction) requires its remediation. Perform remediation to the satisfaction of that authority.

LT-4
To conserve land and protect farmland and wildlife habitat by encouraging development in areas with existing infrastructure. To promote walkability, and transportation efficiency and reduce vehicle distance traveled. To improve public health by encouraging daily physical activity.
Option 1. Surrounding Density (2–3 points BD&C except Core and Shell, 2-4 points Core and Shell)
Locate on a site whose surrounding existing density within a ¼-mile (400-meter) offset of the project boundary meets the values in Table 1. Use either the “separate residential and nonresidential densities” or the “combined density” values.
Table 1a. Points for average density within 1/4 mile of project (IP units)
Combined density Separate residential and nonresidential densities Points BD&C (except Core and Shell) Points BD&C (Core and Shell) Square feet per acre of buildable land Residential density (DU/acre) Nonresidential density (FAR)
22,000
7
0.5
2
2
35,000
12
0.8
3
4
Table 1b. Points for average density within 400 meters of project (SI units)
Combined density Separate residential and nonresidential densities Points BD&C (except Core and Shell) Points BD&C (Core and Shell) Square meters per hectare of Residential density Nonresidential density (FAR)
buildable land (DU/hectare)
5,050
17.5
0.5
2
2
8,035
30
0.8
3
4
DU = dwelling unit; FAR = floor-area ratio.
AND/OR
Option 2. Diverse Uses (1–2 points)
Construct or renovate a building or a space within a building such that the building’s main entrance is within a ½-mile (800-meter) walking distance from the following number of uses (see Appendix 1), as listed below.
Table 1. Points for proximity to uses Uses Points
4–7
1
≥ 8
2
The following restrictions apply.
 A use counts as only one type (e.g., a retail store may be counted only once even if it sells products in several categories).
 No more than two uses in each use type may be counted (e.g. if five restaurants are within walking distance, only two may be counted).
 The counted uses must represent at least three of the five categories, exclusive of the building’s primary use.

LT-5
To encourage development in locations shown to have multimodal transportation choices or otherwise reduced motor vehicle use, thereby reducing greenhouse gas emissions, air pollution, and other environmental and public health harms associated with motor vehicle use.
Locate any functional entry of the project within a ¼-mile (400-meter) walking distance of existing or planned bus, streetcar, or informal transit stops, or within a ½-mile (800-meter) walking distance of existing or planned bus rapid transit stops, passenger rail stations (i.e. light, heavy, or commuter rail) or commuter ferry terminals. The transit service at those stops and stations in aggregate must meet the minimums listed in Table 1. Planned stops and stations may count if they are sited, funded, and under construction by the date of the certificate of occupancy and are complete within 24 months of that date.
Both weekday and weekend trip minimums must be met.
 For each qualifying transit route, only trips in one direction are counted towards the threshold.
 For weekend trips, only trips on the day with the higher number of trips are counted towards the threshold.
 If a qualifying transit route has multiple stops within the required walking distance, only trips from one stop are counted towards the threshold.  Privately-run shuttles are only acceptable if the service is also made available to the public.
Table 1. Minimum daily transit service for projects with one or more transit types (bus, streetcar, rail, or ferry)
Weekday trips
Weekend trips
Points BD&C
(except Core and Shell)
Points BD&C (Core and shell
72
30
1
1
100
70
2
2
144
108
3
3
250
160
4
4
360
216
5
6
If existing transit service is temporarily rerouted outside the required distances for less than two years, the project may meet the requirements, provided the local transit agency has committed to restoring the routes with service at or above the prior level.

LT-6
To promote bicycling and transportation efficiency and reduce vehicle distance traveled. To improve public health by encouraging utilitarian and recreational physical activity.
Bicycle Network
Design or locate the project such that a functional entry or bicycle storage is within a 200-yard (180-meter) walking distance or bicycling distance from a bicycle network that connects to at least one of the following:
 at least 10 diverse uses (see Appendix 1);
 a school or employment center, if the project total floor area is 50% or more residential; or
 a bus rapid transit stop, passenger rail station, or ferry terminal.
All destinations must be within a 3-mile (4800-meter) bicycling distance of the project boundary.
Planned bicycle trails or lanes may be counted if they are fully funded by the date of the certificate of occupancy and are scheduled for completion within one year of that date.
Bicycle Storage and Shower Rooms
Case 1. Commercial or Institutional Projects
Provide short-term bicycle storage for at least 2.5% of all peak visitors, but no fewer than four storage spaces per building.
Provide long-term bicycle storage for at least 5% of all regular building occupants, but no fewer than four storage spaces per building in addition to the short-term bicycle storage spaces.
Provide at least one on-site shower with changing facility for the first 100 regular building occupants and one additional shower for every 150 regular building occupants thereafter.
Case 2. Residential Projects
Provide short-term bicycle storage for at least 2.5% of all peak visitors but no fewer than four storage spaces per building.
Provide long-term bicycle storage for at least 15% of all regular building occupants, but no less than one storage space per three residential units.
Case 3. Mixed-Use Projects
Meet the Case 1 and Case 2 storage requirements for the nonresidential and residential portions of the project, respectively.
Provide at least one on-site shower with changing facility for the first 100 regular building occupants and one additional shower for every 150 regular building occupants thereafter, up to 999 regular building occupants.
 one additional shower for every 500 regular building occupants, for the additional 1,000 – 4,999 regular building occupants
 one additional shower for every 1,000 regular building occupants, for the additional 5,000 + regular building occupants

LT-7
To minimize the environmental harms associated with parking facilities, including automobile dependence, land consumption, and rainwater runoff.
Option 1. No Off-Street Parking (1 point)
Do not provide off-street parking.
OR
Option 2. Reduce Parking (1 point)
Do not exceed the minimum local code requirements for parking capacity.
Provide parking capacity that is a 30% reduction below the base ratios recommended by the Parking Consultants Council, as shown in the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Transportation Planning Handbook, 4th edition, Table 11-12.
OR
Option 3. Carshare (1 point)
Provide dedicated parking for carshare vehicles. Provide at least one vehicle parking space for every 100 occupants, rounded up. If the project has fewer than 100 occupants, provide one carshare vehicle parking space.
Existing carshare vehicles located in nearby on- or off-street parking areas do not contribute to credit achievement.
OR
Option 4. Unbundling Parking (1 point)
Sell parking separately from all property sales or leases.
Implement a daily parking fee at a cost equal to or greater than the daily cost of municipal public transit.
For All Projects
The credit calculations must include all existing and new off-street parking spaces that are leased or owned by the project, including parking that is outside the project boundary but is used by the project. On-street parking in public rights-of-way is excluded from these calculations.

LT-8
To reduce pollution by promoting alternatives to conventionally fueled automobiles.
Provide charging infrastructure for electric vehicles for on-site parking.
Option 1. Electric Vehicle Charging (1 point)
Install electrical vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) in 2% of all parking spaces used by the project or at least two spaces, whichever is greater. Clearly identify and reserve these spaces for the sole use by plug-in electric vehicles.
The EVSE must:
 Provide a Level 2 charging capacity (208 – 240 volts) or greater.
 Comply with the relevant regional or local standard for electrical connectors, such as SAE Surface Vehicle Recommended Practice J1772, SAE Electric Vehicle Conductive Charge Coupler or IEC 62196 of the International Electrotechnical Commission for projects outside the U.S.
 Be vehicle-to-grid (V2G) connected and comply with ISO 15118 and be capable of responding to time-of-use market signals (e.g. price). Projects pursuing EA credit Grid Harmonization should incorporate EVSE into any demand response program or load flexibility and management strategies.
OR
Option 2. Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure (1 point)
Make 6% of parking spaces or at least 6 spaces EV Ready.
To be EV Ready, meet all of the following:
 Install listed raceway capable of accommodating a 208/240-volt dedicated branch circuit.
 The raceway shall not be less than trade size 1 (nominal 1-inch inside diameter).
 The raceway shall originate at the main service or subpanel and shall terminate into a listed cabinet, box or enclosure in close proximity to the proposed location of the EV space.
The service panel and/or subpanel shall provide capacity to install a 40-ampere minimum dedicated branch circuit and space(s) reserved to permit installation of a branch circuit overcurrent protective device.
Multiple Panel Spaces required:
 When multiple charging spaces are required, raceway(s) is/are required to be installed at the time of construction.
 The raceway(s) shall originate at a service panel or subpanel(s) serving the area, and shall terminate in close proximity to the proposed location of the charging equipment into listed cabinet(s), box(es), enclosure(s) or equivalent.
 Construction documents shall indicate raceway termination point and proposed location of future EV spaces and EV chargers. Construction documents shall also provide information on amperage of future EVSE, raceway method(s), wiring schematics and electrical load calculations to verify electrical panel service capacity and electrical system, including any on-site distribution transformer(s), have sufficient capacity to simultaneously charge all EVs at all required EV spaces at full rated amperage of the EVSE
 Plan design shall be based upon a 40-ampere minimum branch circuit.
 Electrical calculations shall substantiate the design of the electrical system, to include the rating of equipment and any on-site distribution transformers and have sufficient capacity to simultaneously charge all required EVs at its full rated amperage.
 The service panel or subpanel(s) shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate the required number of dedicated branch circuit(s) for the future installation of the EVSE.
A parking space with EVSE cannot also be counted as EV Ready.

SS-1
To assess site conditions before design to evaluate sustainable options and inform related decisions about site design.
Complete and document a site survey or assessment1 that includes the following information:
Topography.
 Contour mapping
 Unique topographic features
 Slope stability risks
Hydrology.
 Special Flood Hazard Areas (SPFHA) as determined by FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.)
 Delineated natural water bodies wetlands, lakes, streams, and shorelines (refer to U.S. EPA’s Clean Water Act or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.)
 Rainwater collection and reuse opportunities
 Impervious and pervious surfaces within the site boundary
Climate.
 Solar exposure and shading opportunities
 Heat island effect potential
 Seasonal sun angles
 Prevailing winds
 Average monthly precipitation and temperature ranges
Vegetation.
 Primary vegetation types
 Greenfield area
 Significant tree mapping
 Federal or state threatened or endangered species lists; for projects outside the U.S., International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species
plant species listed by regional, state, or federal entities
 EPA Level III ecoregion description (or local equivalent)
Soils.
 Natural Resources Conservation Service soils delineation (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.)
 U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service (or local equivalent for projects outside the United States) prime farmland, unique farmland, farmland of statewide importance, or farmland of local importance
 Healthy soils
 Previous development
 Disturbed soils
Human use.
 Views
 Adjacent transportation infrastructure, bicycle network, and bicycle storage
 Adjacent diverse uses
 Construction materials with existing recycle or reuse potential
Human health effects.
 Proximity of vulnerable populations
 Adjacent physical activity opportunities
 Proximity to major sources of air and water pollution
The survey or assessment should demonstrate the relationships between the site features and topics listed above and how these features influenced the project design; give the reasons for not addressing any of those topics.

SS-2
To conserve existing natural areas and restore damaged areas to provide habitat and promote biodiversity.
Preserve and protect from all development and construction activity 40% of the greenfield area on the site (if such areas exist).
AND
Option 1. On-Site Restoration (2 points except Healthcare, 1 point Healthcare)
Using native or adapted vegetation, restore 25% (including the building footprint) of all portions of the site identified as previously disturbed. Vegetated roof surfaces may be included if the plants are native or adapted and provide habitat.
Soils
Restore all soils on site that have been disturbed or replace all soils removed by current construction activities that will later serve as the final vegetated area.
 Restore or replace soils to a minimum depth of 12 inches (30.48 centimeters) or depth of root ball for larger plant materials.
 Provide a soils test of imported soils that includes recommended amendments. Incorporate test recommended amendments prior to planting.
 Imported soils must be reused for functions comparable to their original function.
 Imported soils may not include the following:
o soils defined regionally by the Natural Resources Conservation Service web soil survey (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.) as prime farmland, unique farmland, or farmland of statewide or local importance; or
o soils from other greenfield sites
o sphagnum peat moss
Vegetation
Use only plant species that are appropriate for the project’s EPA Level III ecoregion and that are suitable for site conditions, climate, and design intent. Both native and adapted vegetation may qualify. Native grasses may be used in conjunction with a variety (two or more) of native or adapted vegetation species.
 Use only plant species not currently listed as invasive on any federal or qualifying regional lists.
 Protect the root zone of trees found on site. Planting within the one foot (0.30 meter) radius per inch (2.54 centimeters) Diameter Breast Height (DBH) should be avoided.
 Conserve endangered species.
Schools only:
Dedicated athletic fields that are solely for athletic uses are exempted from the soil restoration criteria. These areas may not count toward the minimum required area.
OR
Option 2. Financial Support (1 point)
Provide financial support equivalent to at least $0.20 per square foot (US$2 per square meter) for the total site area (including the building footprint).
Financial support must be provided to a conservation land trust or accredited conservation organization within the same EPA Level III ecoregion or the project’s state (or within 100 miles of the project [160 kilometers] for projects outside the U.S.). For U.S. projects, the land trust must be accredited by the Land Trust Alliance.
For projects outside of the U.S., the conservation land trust must either be a project supported by The Nature Conservancy or World Land Trust.

SS-3
To create exterior open space that encourages interaction with the environment, social interaction, passive recreation, and physical activities.
Provide outdoor space greater than or equal to 30% of the total site area (including building footprint).
25% of the minimum 30% total outdoor space requirement must be planted with two or more types of vegetation or have overhead vegetated canopy.
The outdoor space must be physically accessible and be one or more of the following:
 a pedestrian-oriented paving or landscape area that accommodate outdoor social activities
 a recreation-oriented paving or landscape area that encourage physical activity;
 a landscape area with a two or more of vegetation types that provide opportunities for year-round visual interest;
 a garden space dedicated to community gardens or urban food production;
 preserved or created habitat that meets the criteria of SS Credit Protect or Restore Habitat and also includes elements of human interaction.
Extensive or intensive vegetated roofs that are physically accessible can be used toward the minimum 25% vegetation requirement, and qualifying roof-based physically accessible paving areas can be used toward credit compliance.
Wetlands or naturally designed ponds may count as open space if the side slope gradients average 1:4 (vertical:horizontal) or less and are vegetated.

SS-4
To reduce runoff volume and improve water quality by replicating the natural hydrology and water balance of the site, based on historical conditions and undeveloped ecosystems in the region.
Treat run-off from pollutant-generating impervious surfaces (i.e. vehicle pavement, service courts, trash enclosures) using low-impact development (LID) practice.
Percentile of Rainfall Events (1-3 points except Healthcare, 1-2 points Healthcare)
In a manner best replicating natural site hydrology processes, retain (i.e. infiltrate, evapotranspirate, or collect and reuse) on site the runoff from the developed site for, at minimum, the 80th percentile of regional or local rainfall events using low-impact development (LID) and green infrastructure (GI) practices. GI and LID strategies can be either structural or non-structural. Points are awarded according to Table 1.
For all projects, the use of coal tar sealants shall be prohibited in any application exposed to stormwater, wash waters, condensates, irrigation water, snowmelt, or icemelt.
Examples of acceptable techniques include the following:
 planting rain gardens with native or adapted plant material (e.g. trees shrubs);
 installing a vegetated roof;
 using permeable paving, consisting of porous above-ground materials (e.g., open pavers, engineered products), a base layer designed to drain water away from the building, and (often) a 6-inch-deep (150 millimeters) subbase; and
 installing permanent infiltration or collection features (e.g., vegetated swale, rain garden, rainwater cistern) that can retain 100% of the runoff from at minimum, the 80th percentile of regional or local rainfall events.
A combination of LID approaches are recommended (but not required) as they are holistic measures which maximize benefits. In contrast to LID, conventional stormwater techniques include grey infrastructure, such as detention or retention ponds, pipes, and vaults. Conventional grey infrastructure devices may be accepted only if integrated within a holistic LID system (i.e. a combination of LID techniques).
Use daily rainfall data and the methodology in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Technical Guidance on Implementing the Stormwater Runoff Requirements for Federal Projects under Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act to determine the percentile amount to be retained.
Table 1. Points for percentile of rainfall retained
Percentile of Rainfall Retained
Points
Points Healthcare
80th Percentile
1
1
85th Percentile
2
2
90th Percentile
3
-
Zero Lot Line projects only (1-3 points except Healthcare, 1-2 points Healthcare)
The following requirement applies to zero lot line projects in urban areas with a minimum density of 1.5 FAR. Treat run-off from pollutant-generating impervious surfaces (i.e. vehicle pavement, service courts, trash enclosures) using low-impact development (LID) practice/green infrastructure (GI) (or a traditional stormwater treatment device if LID/GI is not feasible for lack of space). Any above-ground setback area must be designed and used as a pedestrian-oriented space (e.g. restaurant seating, outdoor displays, private vendors, or related public purpose).
In a manner best replicating natural site hydrology processes, retain on site the runoff from the developed site for, at minimum, the 70th percentile of regional or local rainfall events, using LID/GI. Points are awarded according to Table 2.
Table 2. Points for percentile of rainfall retained on Zero Lot Line projects
Percentile of Rainfall Retained
Points
Points Healthcare
70th Percentile
1
1
75th Percentile
2
2
80th Percentile
3
-
If the Zero Lot Line project meets the credit requirements and achieves at least the minimum percentile threshold of rainfall retained, additional volume can be retained offsite so long as the LID/GI system is designed to accommodate use by the project.

SS-5
To minimize effects on microclimates and human and wildlife habitats by reducing heat islands.
Choose one of the following options:
Option 1. Nonroof and Roof (2 points except Healthcare, 1 point Healthcare)
Meet the following criterion:
Area of Nonroof Measures
Area of High-Reflectance Roof
Area of Vegetated Roof
Total Site Paving Area
Total Roof Area
—————
+
——————
+
——————
≥
+
0.5
0.75
0.75
Alternatively, an SRI and SR weighted average approach may be used to calculate compliance.
Use any combination of the following strategies.
Nonroof Measures
 Use the existing plant material or install plants that provide shade over paving areas (including playgrounds) on the site within 10 years of planting. Install vegetated planters. Plants must be in place at the time of occupancy permit and cannot include artificial turf.
 Provide shade with structures covered by energy generation systems, such as solar thermal collectors, photovoltaics, and wind turbines.
 Provide shade with architectural devices or structures. If the device or structure is a roof, it shall have an aged solar reflectance (SR) value of at least 0.28 as measured in accordance with ANSI/CRRC S100. If the device or structure is not a roof, or if aged solar reflectance information is not available, it shall have at installation an initial SR of at least 0.33 as measured in accordance with ANSI/CRRC S100.
 Provide shade with vegetated structures.
 Use paving materials with an initial solar reflectance (SR) value of at least 0.33.
 Use an open-grid pavement system (at least 50% unbound).
High-Reflectance Roof
Use roofing materials that have an aged SRI equal to or greater than the values in Table 1. If aged SRI is not available, the roofing material shall have an initial SRI equal to or greater than the values in Table 1.
Table 1. Minimum solar reflectance index value, by roof slope
Slope
Initial SRI
Aged SRI Low-sloped roof ≤ 2:12 82 64 Steep-sloped roof > 2:12 39 32
Roof area that consists of functional, usable spaces (such as helipads, recreation courts, and areas covered by equipment, solar panels, and appurtenances) may meet the requirements of nonroof measures.
Vegetated Roof
Install a vegetated roof using native or adapted plant species.
OR
Option 2. Parking under Cover (1 point)
Place a minimum of 75% of parking spaces under cover. Any roof used to shade or cover parking must (1) have a three-year aged SRI of at least 32 (if three-year aged value information is not available, use materials with an initial SRI of at least 39 at installation), (2) be a vegetated roof, or (3) be covered by energy generation systems, such as solar thermal collectors, photovoltaics, and wind turbines.
The credit calculations must include all existing and new off-street parking spaces that are leased or owned by the project, including parking that is outside the project boundary but is used by the project. On-street parking in public rights-of-way is excluded from these calculations.

SS-6
To increase night sky access, improve nighttime visibility, and reduce the consequences of development for wildlife and people.
Meet uplight and light trespass requirements, using either the backlight-uplight-glare (BUG) method (Option 1) or the calculation method (Option 2). Projects may use different options for uplight and light trespass.
Meet these requirements for all exterior luminaires located inside the project boundary (except those listed under “Exemptions”), based on the following:
 the photometric characteristics of each luminaire when mounted in the same orientation and tilt as specified in the project design; and
 the lighting zone of the project property (at the time construction begins). Classify the project under one lighting zone using the lighting zones definitions provided in the Illuminating Engineering Society and International Dark Sky Association (IES/IDA) Model Lighting Ordinance (MLO) User Guide.
Additionally, meet the internally illuminated signage requirement.
Uplight
Option 1. BUG Rating Method
Do not exceed the following luminaire uplight ratings, based on the specific light source installed in the luminaire, as defined in IES TM-15-11, Addendum A.
Table 1. Maximum uplight ratings for luminaires
MLO lighting zone
Luminaire uplight rating
LZ0
U0
LZ1
U1
LZ2
U2
LZ3
U3
LZ4
U4
OR
Option 2. Calculation Method
Do not exceed the following percentages of total lumens emitted above horizontal.
Table 2. Maximum percentage of total lumens emitted above horizontal, by lighting zone
MLO lighting zone
Maximum allowed percentage of total luminaire lumens emitted above horizontal
LZ0
0%
LZ1
0%
LZ2
1.5%
LZ3
3%
LZ4
6%
AND
Light Trespass
Option 1. BUG Rating Method
Do not exceed the following luminaire backlight and glare ratings (based on the specific light source installed in the luminaire), as defined in IES TM-15-11, Addendum A, based on the mounting location and distance from the lighting boundary.
Table 3. Maximum backlight and glare ratings
MLO lighting zone Luminaire mounting LZ0 LZ1 LZ2 LZ3 LZ4 Allowed backlight ratings > 2 mounting heights from lighting boundary B1 B3 B4 B5 B5 1 to 2 mounting heights from lighting boundary and properly oriented B1 B2 B3 B4 B4 0.5 to 1 mounting height to lighting boundary and properly oriented B0 B1 B2 B3 B3 < 0.5 mounting height to lighting boundary and properly oriented B0 B0 B0 B1 B2 Allowed glare ratings Building-mounted > 2 mounting heights from any lighting boundary G0 G1 G2 G3 G4
Building-mounted 1–2 mounting heights from any lighting boundary G0 G0 G1 G1 G2 Building-mounted 0.5 to 1 mounting heights from any lighting boundary G0 G0 G0 G1 G1 Building-mounted < 0.5 mounting heights from any lighting boundary G0 G0 G0 G0 G1 All other luminaires G0 G1 G2 G3 G4
The lighting boundary is located at the property lines of the property, or properties, that the LEED project occupies. The lighting boundary can be modified under the following conditions:
 When the property line abuts a public area that includes, but is not limited to, a walkway, bikeway, plaza, or parking lot, the lighting boundary may be moved to 5 feet (1.5 meters) beyond the property line.
 When the property line abuts a public street, alley, or transit corridor, the lighting boundary may be moved to the center line of that street, alley, or corridor.
 When there are additional properties owned by the same entity that are contiguous to the property, or properties, that the LEED project is within and have the same or higher MLO lighting zone designation as the LEED project, the lighting boundary may be expanded to include those properties.
Orient all luminaires less than two mounting heights from the lighting boundary such that the backlight points toward the nearest lighting boundary line. Building-mounted luminaires with the backlight oriented toward the building are exempt from the backlight rating requirement.
OR
Option 2. Calculation Method
Do not exceed the following vertical illuminances at the lighting boundary (use the definition of lighting boundary in Option 1). Calculation points may be no more than 5 feet (1.5 meters) apart. Vertical illuminances must be calculated on vertical planes running parallel to the lighting boundary, with the normal to each plane oriented toward the property and perpendicular to the lighting boundary, extending from grade level to 33 feet (10 meters) above the height of the highest luminaire.
Table 4. Maximum vertical illuminance at lighting boundary, by lighting zone
MLO lighting zone
Vertical illuminance
LZ0
0.05 fc (0.5 lux)
LZ1
0.05 fc (0.5 lux)
LZ2
0.10 fc (1 lux)
LZ3
0.20 fc (2 lux)
LZ4
0.60 fc (6 lux)
FC = footcandle.
AND
Internally Illuminated Exterior Signage
Do not exceed a luminance of 200 cd/m2 (nits) during nighttime hours and 2000 cd/m2 (nits) during daytime hours.
Exemptions from Uplight and Light Trespass Requirements
The following exterior lighting is exempt from the requirements, provided it is controlled separately from the nonexempt lighting:
 specialized signal, directional, and marker lighting for transportation;
 lighting that is used solely for façade and landscape lighting in MLO lighting zones 3 and 4, and is automatically turned off from midnight until 6 a.m.;
 lighting for theatrical purposes for stage, film, and video performances;
 government-mandated roadway lighting;
 hospital emergency departments, including associated helipads;
 lighting for the national flag in MLO lighting zones 2, 3, or 4; and
 internally illuminated signage.

WE-1
To reduce outdoor water consumption.
Reduce outdoor water use through one of the following options. Nonvegetated surfaces, such as permeable or impermeable pavement, should be excluded from landscape area calculations. Athletic fields and playgrounds (if vegetated) and food gardens may be included or excluded at the project team’s discretion.
Option 1. No Irrigation Required (2 points except Healthcare and CS, 1 point Healthcare, 3 points CS)
Show that the landscape does not require a permanent irrigation system beyond a maximum two-year establishment period.
OR
Option 2. Reduced Irrigation (1-2 points except Healthcare and CS, 1 point Healthcare, 3 points CS)
Reduce the project’s landscape water requirement (LWR) by at least 50% from the calculated baseline for the site’s peak watering month. Reductions must first be achieved through plant species selection and irrigation system efficiency as calculated in the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) WaterSense Water Budget Tool.
Additional reductions beyond 30% may be achieved using any combination of efficiency, alternative water sources, and smart scheduling technologies.
Table 1. Points for reducing irrigation water
Percentage reduction from baseline
Points (except Healthcare)
Points (Healthcare)
Points (CS) 50% 1 1 1 75% -- -- 2 100% 2 — 3

WE-2
To reduce indoor water consumption.
Further reduce fixture and fitting water use from the calculated baseline in WE Prerequisite Indoor Water Use Reduction. Additional potable water savings can be earned above the prerequisite level using alternative water sources. Include fixtures and fittings necessary to meet the needs of the occupants. Some of these fittings and fixtures may be outside the tenant space (for Commercial Interiors) or project boundary (for New Construction). Points are awarded according to Table 1.
Table 1. Points for reducing water use
Percentage
Reduction
Points (BD+C)
Points (CS)
Points
(Schools, Retail, Hospitality, Healthcare) 25% 1 1 1 30% 2 2 2 35% 3 3 3 40% 4 4 4 45% 5 -- 5 50% 6 -- --
Schools, Retail, Hospitality, and Healthcare only
Meet the percentage reduction requirements above.
AND
Appliance and Process Water. Install equipment within the project scope that meets the minimum requirements in Table 2, 3, 4, or 5. One point is awarded for meeting all applicable requirements in any one table. All applicable equipment listed in each table must meet the standard.
Schools, Retail, and Healthcare projects can earn a second point for meeting the requirements of two tables.
Table 2. Compliant commercial washing machines
To use Table 2, the project must process at least 120,000 lbs. (57 606 kg) of laundry per year. Washing machine Requirement (IP units) Requirement (SI units) On-premise, minimum capacity 2,400 lbs. (1 088 kg) per 8-hour shift Maximum 1.8 gals per pound * Maximum 7 liters per 0.45 kilograms *
* Based on equal quantities of heavy, medium, and light soil laundry.
Table 3. Standards for commercial kitchen equipment
To use Table 3, the project must serve at least 100 meals per day of operation. All process and appliance equipment listed in the category of kitchen equipment and present on the project must comply with the standards. Kitchen equipment Requirement (IP units) Requirement (SI units) Dishwasher Undercounter ENERGY STAR ENERGY STAR or performance equivalent Stationary, single tank, door ENERGY STAR ENERGY STAR or performance equivalent Single tank, conveyor ENERGY STAR ENERGY STAR or performance equivalent Multiple tank, conveyor ENERGY STAR ENERGY STAR or performance equivalent Flight machine ENERGY STAR ENERGY STAR or performance equivalent Food steamer Batch (no drain connection) ≤ 2 gal/hour/pan including condensate cooling water ≤ 7.5 liters/hour/pan including condensate cooling water Cook-to-order (with drain connection) ≤ 5 gal/hour/pan including condensate cooling water ≤ 19 liters/hour/pan including condensate cooling water Combination oven, Countertop or stand ≤ 1.5 gal/hour/pan including condensate cooling water ≤ 5.7 liters/hour/pan including condensate cooling water
Roll-in ≤ 1.5 gal/hour/pan including condensate cooling water ≤ 5.7 liters/hour/pan including condensate cooling water Food waste disposer Disposer 3-8 gpm, full load condition, 10 minute automatic shutoff; or 1 gpm, no-load condition 11–30 lpm, full load condition, 10-min automatic shutoff; or 3.8 lpm, no-load condition Scrap collector Maximum 2 gpm makeup water Maximum 7.6 lpm makeup water Pulper Maximum 2 gpm makeup water Maximum 7.6 lpm makeup water Strainer basket No additional water usage No additional water usage
gpm = gallons per minute
gph = gallons per hour
lpm = liters per minute
lph = liters per hour
Table 4. Compliant laboratory and medical equipment
To use Table 4, the project must be a medical or laboratory facility.
Lab equipment Requirement (IP units) Requirement (SI units) Reverse-osmosis water purifier 75% recovery 75% recovery Steam sterilizer For 60-inch sterilizer, 6.3 gal/U.S. tray For 48-inch sterilizer, 7.5 gal/U.S. tray For 1520-mm sterilizer, 28.5 liters/DIN tray For 1220-mm sterilizer, 28.35 liters/DIN tray Sterile process washer 0.35 gal/U.S. tray 1.3 liters/DIN tray X-ray processor, 150 mm or more in any dimension Film processor water recycling unit Digital imager, all sizes No water use
Table 5. Compliant municipal steam systems
To use Table 5, the project must be connected to a municipal or district steam system that does not allow the return of steam condensate.
Steam system
Standard
Steam condensate disposal
Cool municipally supplied steam condensate (no return) to drainage system with heat recovery system or reclaimed water
OR
Reclaim and use steam condensate
100% recovery and reuse

WE-3
To conserve water used for mechanical processes and cooling tower makeup while controlling microbes, corrosion, and scale in the condenser water system.
Option 1. Cooling Tower Water Use (1-2 points except CS, 1-3 points CS)
For cooling towers and evaporative condensers, conduct a one-time potable water analysis, measuring at least the five control parameters listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Maximum concentrations for parameters in condenser water Parameter Maximum level Ca (as CaCO3) 1000 ppm Total alkalinity 1000 ppm SiO2 100 ppm Cl- 250 ppm Conductivity 2000 μS/cm
ppm = parts per million
μS/cm = micro siemens per centimeter
Calculate the maximum number of cooling tower cycles by dividing the maximum allowed concentration level of each parameter by the actual concentration level of each parameter found in the potable makeup water analysis. Limit cooling tower cycles to avoid exceeding maximum values for any of these parameters.
Table 2. Points for cooling tower cycles
Cooling tower cycles
Points (all except CS)
Points (CS) Maximum number of cycles achieved without exceeding any filtration levels or affecting operation of condenser water system 1 1
Meet the maximum calculated number of cycles to earn 1 point, and increase the number of cycles by a minimum of 25% by increasing the level of treatment and/or maintenance in condenser or make-up water systems OR Meet the maximum calculated number of cycles to earn 1 point and use a minimum 20% recycled nonpotable water 2 2 Meet the maximum calculated number of cycles to earn 1 point, and increase the number of cycles by a minimum of 30% by increasing the level of treatment and/or maintenance in condenser or make-up water systems OR Meet the maximum calculated number of cycles to earn 1 point and use a minimum 30% recycled nonpotable water -- 3
Minimum percentage recycled nonpotable water used in cooling tower makeup should be based on water use during the month with the highest demand for make-up water. Projects whose cooling is provided by district cooling systems are eligible to achieve Option 1 if the district cooling system complies with the above requirements. OR Option 2. No Cooling Tower (2 points) For projects without cooling towers or evaporative condensers, projects may earn full credit if all conditions are met:  the baseline system designated for the building using ASHRAE 90.1-2016 Appendix G Table G3.1.1 includes a cooling tower (systems 7 & 8)  the project design case does not include a cooling tower  the design case mechanical system does not use the latent heat of the evaporative cooling of water.  the project does not receive any cooling from a District cooling system All other system types are ineligible for credit. OR
Option 3. Process Water Use (1-2 points except CS, 1-3 points CS)
Demonstrate that the project is using minimum 20% recycled alternative water to meet process water demand for 1 point, or using minimum 30% recycled alternative water to meet process water demand for 2 points. Ensure that recycled alternative water is of sufficient quality for its intended end use.
Minimum percentage of recycled alternative water used should be based on water use during the month with the highest water demand.
Process water uses eligible for achievement of Option 3 must represent at least 10% of total building water use. Eligible subsystems may include:
Boilers  Humidification systems  Other subsystems using process water Projects whose cooling is provided by district cooling systems are eligible to achieve Option 3 if the district cooling system complies with minimum thresholds for recycled alternative water use.

WE-4
To support water management and identify opportunities for additional water savings by tracking water consumption.
Install permanent water meters for two or more of the following water subsystems, as applicable to the project:
 Irrigation. Meter water systems serving at least 80% of the irrigated landscaped area. Calculate the percentage of irrigated landscape area served as the total metered irrigated landscape area divided by the total irrigated landscape area. Landscape areas fully covered with xeriscaping or native vegetation that requires no routine irrigation may be excluded from the calculation.
 Indoor plumbing fixtures and fittings. Meter water systems serving at least 80% of the indoor fixtures and fitting described in WE Prerequisite Indoor Water Use Reduction, either directly or by deducting all other measured water use from the measured total water consumption of the building and grounds.
 Domestic hot water. Meter water use of at least 80% of the installed domestic hot water heating capacity (including both tanks and on-demand heaters).
 Boiler with aggregate projected annual water use of 100,000 gallons (378 500 liters) or more, or boiler of more than 500,000 BtuH (150 kW). A single makeup meter may record flows for multiple boilers.
 Reclaimed water. Meter reclaimed water, regardless of rate. A reclaimed water system with a makeup water connection must also be metered so that the true reclaimed water component can be determined.
 Other process water. Meter at least 80% of expected daily water consumption for process end uses, such as humidification systems, dishwashers, clothes washers, pools, and other subsystems using process water.

EA-1
To further support the design, construction, and eventual operation of a project that meets the owner’s project requirements for energy, water, indoor environmental quality, and durability.
Implement, or have in place a contract to implement, the following commissioning process activities in addition to those required under EA Prerequisite Fundamental Commissioning and Verification.
Commissioning Authority Qualifications:
 The CxA must have documented commissioning process experience on at least two building projects with a similar scope of work. The experience must extend from early design phase through at least 10 months of occupancy;
 The CxA may be a qualified employee of the owner, an independent consultant, or a disinterested subcontractor of the design team.
Option 1. Enhanced Systems Commissioning (3-4 points)
Path 1: Enhanced Commissioning (3 points)
Complete the following commissioning process (CxP) activities for mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and renewable energy systems and assemblies in accordance with ASHRAE Guideline 0–2013 and ASHRAE Guideline 1.1–2007 for HVAC&R systems, as they relate to energy, water, indoor environmental quality, and durability.
The commissioning authority must do the following:
 Review contractor submittals.
 Verify inclusion of systems manual requirements in construction documents.
 Verify inclusion of operator and occupant training requirements in construction documents.
 Verify systems manual updates and delivery.
 Verify operator and occupant training delivery and effectiveness.
 Verify seasonal testing.
 Review building operations 10 months after substantial completion.
 Develop an on-going commissioning plan.
Include all enhanced commissioning tasks in the OPR and BOD.
OR
Path 2: Enhanced and Monitoring-Based Commissioning (4 points)
Achieve Path 1.
AND
Develop monitoring-based procedures and identify points to be measured and evaluated to assess performance of energy- and water-consuming systems.
Include the procedures and measurement points in the commissioning plan. Address the following:
 roles and responsibilities;
 measurement requirements (meters, points, metering systems, data access);
 the points to be tracked, with frequency and duration for trend monitoring;
 the limits of acceptable values for tracked points and metered values (where appropriate, predictive algorithms may be used to compare ideal values with actual values);
 the elements used to evaluate performance, including conflict between systems, out-of-sequence operation of systems components, and energy and water usage profiles;
 an action plan for identifying and correcting operational errors and deficiencies;
 training to prevent errors;
 planning for repairs needed to maintain performance; and
 the frequency of analyses in the first year of occupancy (at least quarterly).
Update the systems manual with any modifications or new settings, and give the reason for any modifications from the original design.
AND/OR
Option 2. Building Enclosure Commissioning (2 points)
Fulfill the requirements in EA Prerequisite Fundamental Commissioning and Verification as they apply to the building’s enclosure in addition to mechanical and electrical systems and assemblies.
Complete the following commissioning process (CxP) activities for the building’s thermal envelope in accordance with ASHRAE Guideline 0–2013 and ASTM E2947-16: Standard Guide for Building Enclosure Commissioning, as they relate to energy, air and water tightness, indoor environmental quality, and durability.
The qualified independent member of the design or construction team responsible for building enclosure commissioning must complete the following:
 Review contractor submittals.
 Verify inclusion of systems manual requirements in construction documents for enclosure systems.
 For specialty enclosure systems with controls and automation:
o Verify inclusion of operator and occupant training requirements in construction documents.
o Verify systems manual updates and delivery.
o Verify operator and occupant training delivery and effectiveness.
o Verify seasonal testing.
o Review building operations 10 months after substantial completion.
Develop an on-going enclosure commissioning plan for maintenance, renewal and revitalization cycles.

EA-2
To achieve increasing levels of energy performance beyond the prerequisite standard to reduce environmental and economic harms associated with excessive energy use.
Establish an energy performance target no later than the schematic design phase. The target must be established using one of the following metrics:
 kBtu per square foot-year (kWh per square meter-year) of site energy use
 kBtu per square foot-year (kWh per square meter-year) of source energy use
 pounds per square foot-year (Kg per square meter-year) of greenhouse gas emissions
 energy cost per square foot-year (cost per square meter-year)
Analyze efficiency measures during the design process and account for the results in design decision making. Use energy simulation of efficiency opportunities, past energy simulation analyses for similar buildings, or published data (e.g., Advanced Energy Design Guides) from analyses for similar buildings.
Analyze efficiency measures, focusing on load reduction and HVAC-related strategies (passive measures are acceptable) appropriate for the facility. Project potential energy savings and holistic project cost implications related to all affected systems.
Choose one of the options below.
Option 1. Energy Performance Compliance (1–18 points except Schools and Healthcare, 1–16 points Schools, 1–20 points Healthcare)
Demonstrate a Performance Cost Index (PCI)1 below the Performance Cost Index Target (PCIt) calculated in accordance with Section 4.2.1.1 of ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-2016, Appendix G, Table 4.2.1.1. For mixed use buildings, the required PCI shall be calculated by using an area weighted average of the building types.
Calculate the PCI, PCIt, and percentage improvement using metrics of cost and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. For each energy source serving the building, the GHG emission factors must be identical for the Baseline and Proposed building models.
LEED points are calculated based on the project percent improvement PCI below the PCIt using metrics of cost and GHG emissions. Total points have been divided equally between the metrics of energy cost and greenhouse gas emissions. Points are awarded according to Table 1 and Table 2.
For project percent improvement for the cost metric, on-site renewable energy may be subtracted from proposed energy cost prior to calculating proposed building performance per ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2016 Section G 2.4.1.
Table 1. Points for percentage improvement in energy performance – % Cost PCI below PCIt (1-9 points NC and CS, 1-8 points Schools, 1-10 points Healthcare)
New Construction Healthcare, Major Renovation, CS Points BD+C (except Schools, Healthcare) Points Healthcare Points Schools 5% 2% 1 1 1 10% 5% 2 2 2 15% 10% 3 3 3 20% 15% 4 4 4 25% 20% 5 5 5 30% 25% 6 6 6 35% 30% 7 7 7 40% 35% 8 8 45% 40% 9 9 8 50% 45% EP 10 EP 50% EP
On-site renewable energy may be subtracted from proposed greenhouse gas emissions prior to calculating proposed building performance per ASHRAE Standard 90.1-2016 Section G 2.4.1. New off-site renewable energy as defined in EA credit Renewable Energy may be subtracted from proposed greenhouse gas emissions prior to calculating proposed building performance.
Table 2. Points for percentage improvement in energy performance – % Greenhouse Gas Emissions PCI below PCIt (1-9 points NC, 1-8 points Schools, 1-10 points Healthcare)
OR
Option 2. Prescriptive Compliance: ASHRAE Advanced Energy Design Guide (1–6 points, 1-4 points CS)
To be eligible for Option 2, projects must meet the Scope requirements of the applicable AEDGs (or combination of AEDGs for mixed use), and projects must use the ASHRAE 90.1-2016 Prescriptive compliance path in EA Prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance.
Implement and document compliance with the applicable recommendations and standards in Chapter 4, Design Strategies and Recommendations by Climate Zone, for the appropriate ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide and climate zone.
ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small to Medium Office Buildings
Building envelope: roofs, walls, floors, slabs, doors, continuous air barriers, and vertical fenestration (1 point, 2 points CS)
 Interior and exterior lighting, including daylighting and interior finishes (1 point). CS: Minimum 20% of building area must have a complete lighting design.
 Plug loads, including equipment and controls (2 points, 0 points CS)
 HVAC Systems and Controls (2 points, 1 point CS). CS scope of work must include at least 20% of the building’s projected cooling capacity, heating capacity, and fan volume.
ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide for Medium to Large Box Retail Buildings
 Building envelope: roofs, walls, floors, slabs, doors, vestibules and fenestration – all orientations (1 point, 2 points CS)
 Interior and exterior lighting, excluding lighting power density for sales floor (1 point). CS: Minimum 20% of building area must have a complete lighting design
 Additional interior lighting for sales floor (1 point, 0 points CS)
 Plug loads, including equipment choices and controls (1 point, 0 points CS)
 HVAC efficiency and control requirements (2 points, 1 point CS). CS scope of work must include at least 20% of the building’s projected cooling capacity, heating capacity, and fan volume)
ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide for K–12 School Buildings
(Not applicable for CS)
 Building envelope: roofs, walls, floors, slabs, doors and vertical fenestration (1 point)
 Interior and exterior lighting, including daylighting and interior finishes (1 point)
 Plug loads, including equipment choices, controls, and kitchen equipment (2 points)
 HVAC efficiency and control requirements (2 points)
ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide for Large Hospitals
 Building envelope: roofs, walls, floors, slabs, doors, vestibules, continuous air barriers, and vertical fenestration (1 point, 2 points CS)
 Interior and exterior lighting, including daylighting (form or nonform driven) and interior finishes (1 point). CS: Minimum 20% of building area must have a complete lighting design
 Plug loads, including equipment choices, controls, and kitchen equipment (1 point, 0 points CS)
 HVAC and Service Water Heating Systems and Equipment (2 points) (1 point CS. CS scope of work must include at least 20% of the building’s projected cooling capacity, heating capacity, and fan volume)
ASHRAE 50% Advanced Energy Design Guide for Grocery Stores
 Building envelope: roofs, walls, floors, slabs, doors, vestibules, continuous air barriers, and vertical fenestration (1 point) (2 points – CS)
 Interior and exterior lighting, including sales floor (1 points)
 Refrigeration, Plug, and Process loads, including equipment choices and controls (2 points)(0 points CS)
 HVAC efficiency and control requirements (1 point) (1 point CS. CS scope of work must include at least 20% of the building’s projected cooling capacity, heating capacity, and fan volume)
Option 3. Systems Optimization (1-4 points)
To be eligible for Option 3, projects must use the ASHRAE 90.1-2016 Prescriptive compliance path in EA Prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance, and must not have more than 2,000 square feet of data center space, laboratory space, or manufacturing space.
Demonstrate an improvement beyond ASHRAE/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1–2016, with errata, for the following systems: Interior and Exterior Lighting; Daylight controls; Building envelope; HVAC and service water heating equipment efficiency; and Equipment and appliances. Each three strategies selected earns 1 point (For Core & Shell lighting and HVAC efficiency measures, the project scope of work must include a complete design for at least 20% of the building area to qualify).
 Interior and Exterior Lighting:
o 15% lighting power reduction
o 30% lighting power reduction
o 45% lighting power reduction
 Daylight controls:
Install daylight-responsive controls for a given percentage of connected lighting load (lighting in non-regularly occupied space with occupant sensor controls may be excluded from connected lighting load).
o 35%
o 70%
 Building envelope:
o Climate Zones 1 – 2:
 Thermal Mass Enclosure: More than 70% of opaque above-grade wall area meets ASHRAE 90.1-2016 definition for “mass wall”; and more than 70% of floor area meets ASHRAE 90.1-2016 definition for “mass floor”
 25% Envelope UA reduction
 50% SHGC reduction (including window shade factors)
o Climate Zones 3 – 8:
 25% Envelope UA reduction
 50% Envelope UA reduction
 25% reduction in air infiltration measured during commissioning
 HVAC and Service Water Heating Equipment Efficiency:
o Reduction in total fan power allowance of:
 15%
 30%
 45%
o Improvement in efficiency for at least 75% of the combined cooling, heating, and service water heating capacity
 10%
 20%
 30%
Electric resistance heating except heat pump auxiliary heat must be included in total capacity.
 Equipment and Appliances:
Install a percentage (by rated power) of eligible equipment and appliances meeting the following requirements:
o ENERGY STAR equipment including appliances, office equipment, electronics, and commercial food service equipment (lighting and building envelope products are excluded from this credit). (Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) equipment may be used in lieu of Energy Star equipment where applicable).
o Prescriptive commercial kitchen and refrigeration equipment requirements listed in Appendix 3, Table 1.
The project scope of work must include at least 0.25 Watts per square foot of eligible equipment to apply this strategy.
Percent of Eligible Equipment Installed by Rated Power:
 20%
 40%
 60%
 80%
 100%

EA-3
To support energy management and identify opportunities for additional energy savings by tracking building-level and system-level energy use.
Install advanced energy metering for the following:
 all whole-building energy sources used by the building; and
 any individual energy end uses that represent 10% or more of the total annual consumption of the building.
The advanced energy metering must have the following characteristics.
 Meters must be permanently installed, record at intervals of one hour or less, and transmit data to a remote location.
 Electricity meters must record both consumption and demand. Whole-building electricity meters should record the power factor, if appropriate.
 The data collection system must use a local area network, building automation system, wireless network, or comparable communication infrastructure.
 The system must be capable of storing all meter data for at least 36 months.
 The data must be remotely accessible.
 All meters in the system must be capable of reporting hourly, daily, monthly, and annual energy use.

EA-4
To increase participation in demand response technologies and programs that make energy generation and distribution systems more efficient, increase grid reliability, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Design building and equipment for participation in demand response programs through load shedding or shifting. On-site electricity generation does not meet the intent of this credit.
Case 1. Demand Response Program Available and Participation (2 points)
 Participate in an existing demand response (DR) program and complete the following activities. Design a system with the capability for real-time, fully-automated DR based on external initiation by a DR Program Provider. Semi-automated DR may be utilized in practice.
 Enroll in a minimum one-year DR participation amount contractual commitment with a qualified DR program provider, with the intention of multiyear renewal, for at least 10% of the annual on-peak electricity demand. On-peak demand is determined under EA Prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance. The on-peak demand may vary based on the utility climate and pricing structures.
 Develop a comprehensive plan for meeting the contractual commitment during a Demand Response event.
 Include the DR processes in the scope of work for the commissioning authority, including participation in at least one full test of the DR plan.
 Include the DR program and any installed technologies in the building systems manual.
 Initiate at least one full test of the DR plan.
OR
Case 2. Demand Response Capable Building (1 point)
Have infrastructure in place to take advantage of future demand response programs or dynamic, real-time pricing programs and complete the following activities:
 Install interval recording meters with communications and ability for the building automation system to accept an external price or control signal.
Develop a comprehensive plan for shedding at least 10% of the annual on-peak electricity demand. On-peak demand is determined under EA Prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance.
 Include the DR processes in the scope of work for the commissioning authority, including participation in at least one full test of the DR plan.
 Include the DR program and any installed technologies in the building systems manual.
 Contact local utility representatives to discuss participation in future DR programs.
AND / OR
Case 3. Load Flexibility and Management Strategies (1-2 points)
Analyze the building’s annual load shape and peak load based as calculated for EA prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance. Review the regional grid load profile using the metric of peak load or peak carbon emissions. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) AVoided Emissions and geneRation Tool (AVERT) provides regional grid emissions data; local utilities may also provide this data.
Coordinate review of building load shape and peak load with review of the regional grid profile to identify the best value load management strategies that the building can provide.
Implement one or more of the load flexibility and management strategies described below for a maximum of up to two points. All projects must install interval recording meters with communications and the ability for the building automation system to accept an external price signal.
Load Flexibility and Management Strategies:
 Peak Load Optimization: demonstrate that strategy reduces on-peak load by at least 10% as compared to peak electrical demand (1 point)
 Flexible Operating Scenarios: demonstrate that strategy moves at least 10% of peak load by a time period of 2 hours (1 point)
 On-site thermal and/or electricity storage: demonstrate that strategy reduces on-peak load by at least 10% as compared to peak electrical demand (1 point)
 Grid resilience technologies: project served by utilities with resilience programs in place, which leverage strategies such as islanding and part-load operation, automatically achieve this credit (1 point)
Include installed technology in the scope of work for the commissioning authority. Include load flexibility and management strategies and installed technologies in the building systems manual.
Contact local utility representatives to discuss participation in future DR programs and to inform utility of building load flexibility and management strategies.

EA-5
To reduce the environmental and economic harms associated with fossil fuel energy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by increasing self-supply of renewable energy and the use of grid-source, renewable energy technologies and carbon mitigation projects.
Use on-site renewable energy systems, procure renewable energy offsite, or purchase Energy Attribute Certificates (EACs) or carbon offsets to meet or offset annual building greenhouse gas emissions.
Projects may choose one or more strategies for renewables procurement from the categories below. Points achieved in each category may be added for up to a total of 5 points.
Environmental benefits of all procurement must be retained by the project.
All off-site qualifying resources must be contracted, owned, or leased for at least 15 years.
Existing off-site renewables, EACs and carbon offsets must be procured from projects that have come online or been built within the last 15 years.
Table 1. Points for Renewables Procurement
Points
On-Site Renewables
New
Off-Site Renewables
Existing
Off-Site Renewables
Green-e Certified: EACs & Carbon Offsets
EACs & Carbon Offsets
1
2%
20%
60%
100%
150%
2
6%
40%
80%
200%
3
15%
60%
100%
300%
4
35%
80%
5
60%
100%
EP
100%
New Off-site Renewables: built within the last year or contracted prior to renewable energy project development.
Existing Off-site Renewables: contracted from an existing renewable energy provider.

EA-6
To reduce ozone depletion and support early compliance with the Montreal Protocol while minimizing direct contributions to climate change.
Option 1. No Refrigerants or Low-Impact Refrigerants (1 point)
Do not use refrigerants, or use only refrigerants (naturally occurring or synthetic) that have an ozone depletion potential (ODP) of zero and a global warming potential (GWP) of less than 50.
OR
Option 2. Calculation of Refrigerant Impact (1 point)
Select refrigerants that are used in heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and refrigeration (HVAC&R) equipment to minimize or eliminate the emission of compounds that contribute to ozone depletion and climate change. The combination of all new and existing base building and tenant HVAC&R equipment that serve the project must comply with the following formula:
IP units LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 100
SI units LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 13
Calculation definitions for LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 100 (IP units) Calculation definitions for LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ≤ 13 (SI units) LCODP = [ODPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCODP = [ODPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCGWP = [GWPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCGWP = [GWPr x (Lr x Life +Mr) x Rc]/Life LCODP: Lifecycle Ozone Depletion Potential (lb CFC 11/Ton-Year) LCODP: Lifecycle Ozone Depletion Potential (kg CFC 11/(kW/year)) LCGWP: Lifecycle Direct Global Warming Potential (lb CO2/Ton-Year) LCGWP: Lifecycle Direct Global Warming Potential (kg CO2/kW-year)
GWPr: Global Warming Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 12,000 lb CO2/lbr) GWPr: Global Warming Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 12,000 kg CO2/kg r) ODPr: Ozone Depletion Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 0.2 lb CFC 11/lbr) ODPr: Ozone Depletion Potential of Refrigerant (0 to 0.2 kg CFC 11/kg r) Lr: Refrigerant Leakage Rate (2.0%) Lr: Refrigerant Leakage Rate (2.0%) Mr: End-of-life Refrigerant Loss (10%) Mr: End-of-life Refrigerant Loss (10%) Rc: Refrigerant Charge (0.5 to 5.0 lbs. of refrigerant per ton of gross AHRI rated cooling capacity) Rc: Refrigerant Charge (0.065 to 0.65 kg of refrigerant per kW of AHRI rated or Eurovent Certified cooling capacity) Life: Equipment Life (10 years; default based on equipment type, unless otherwise demonstrated) Life: Equipment Life (10 years; default based on equipment type, unless otherwise demonstrated)
For multiple types of equipment, calculate a weighted average of all base building HVAC&R equipment, using the following formula:
IP units SI units [ Σ ( LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ) x Qunit ] ≤ 100 [ Σ ( LCGWP + LCODP x 105 ) x Qunit ] ≤ 13 ——————————————————Qtotal —————————————————— Qtotal
Calculation definitions for [ Σ (LCGWP + LCODP x 105) x Qunit ] / Qtotal ≤ 100 (IP units) Calculation definitions for [ Σ (LCGWP + LCODP x 105) x Qunit ] / Qtotal ≤ 13 (SI units) Qunit = Gross AHRI rated cooling capacity of an individual HVAC or refrigeration unit (Tons) Qunit = Eurovent Certified cooling capacity of an individual HVAC or refrigeration unit (kW) Qtotal = Total gross AHRI rated cooling capacity of all HVAC or refrigeration Qtotal = Total Eurovent Certified cooling capacity of all HVAC or refrigeration (kW)

MR-1
To encourage adaptive reuse and optimize the environmental performance of products and materials.
Demonstrate reduced environmental effects during initial project decision-making by reusing existing building resources or demonstrating a reduction in materials use through life-cycle assessment. Achieve one of the following options.
Option 1. Historic Building Reuse (5 points BD&C, 6 points Core and Shell)
Maintain the existing building structure, envelope, and interior nonstructural elements of a historic building or contributing building in a historic district. To qualify, the building or historic district must be listed or eligible for listing in the local, state, or national register of historic places. Do not demolish any part of a historic building or contributing building in a historic district unless it is deemed structurally unsound or hazardous. For buildings listed locally, approval of any demolition must be granted by the local historic preservation review board. For buildings listed in a state register or the U.S. National Register of Historic Places (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.), approval must appear in a programmatic agreement with the state historic preservation office or National Park Service (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.).
Any alteration (preservation, restoration, or rehabilitation) of a historic building or a contributing building in a historic district on the project site must be done in accordance with local or national standards for rehabilitation, whichever are applicable. If building is not subject to historic review, include on the project team a preservation professional who meets U.S. federal qualifications for historic architects (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.); the preservation professional must confirm conformance to the Secretary of Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S.).
OR
Option 2. Renovation of Abandoned or Blighted Building (5 points BD&C, 6 points Core and Shell)
Maintain at least 50%, by surface area, of the existing building structure, enclosure, and interior structural elements for buildings that meet local criteria of abandoned or are considered blight. The
building must be renovated to a state of productive occupancy. Up to 25% of the building surface area may be excluded from credit calculation because of deterioration or damage.
OR
Option 3. Building and Material Reuse (1–4 points BD&C, 2-5 points Core and Shell)
Materials contributing toward this credit may not contribute toward MR Credit Material Disclosure and Optimization – Sourcing of Raw Materials. Path 1 or Path 2 (a/b) may be attempted but combining Path 1 and Path 2 to achieve points is not allowed.
Path 1: Maintain A Combination of Structural and Non-Structural Elements (2-4 points)
Reuse or salvage building materials from off site or on site as a percentage of the surface area, as listed in Table 1. Include structural elements (e.g., floors, roof decking), enclosure materials (e.g., skin, framing), and permanently installed interior elements (e.g., walls, doors, floor coverings, ceiling systems). Exclude from the calculation window assemblies and any hazardous materials that are remediated as a part of the project.
Table 1. Points for reuse of building materials Percentage of completed project surface area reused Points BD&C Points BD&C (Core and Shell) 25% 2 2 50% 3 3 75% 4 5
OR
Path 2a: Maintain Existing Walls, Floors and Roofs (1-3 points):
Maintain the existing building structure (including floor and roof decking) and envelope (the exterior skin and framing, excluding window assemblies and nonstructural roofing materials).
Percent of existing walls, floors and roof reuse Points 25% 1 50% 2 75% 3
AND/OR
Path 2b: Maintain Interior Nonstructural Elements (1 point)
Use existing interior nonstructural elements (e.g. interior walls, doors, floor coverings and ceiling systems) in at least 33% (by area) of the completed building, including additions.
OR
Option 4. Whole-Building Life-Cycle Assessment (1-4 points)
For new construction (buildings or portions of buildings), conduct a life-cycle assessment of the project’s structure and enclosure and select one or more of the following paths below to earn up to 4 points:
Path 1: Conduct a life cycle assessment of the project’s structure and enclosure (1 point).
Path 2: Conduct a life cycle assessment of the project’s structure and enclosure that demonstrates a minimum of 5% reduction, compared with a baseline building in at least three of the six impact categories listed below, one of which must be global warming potential (2 points).
Path 3: Conduct a life cycle assessment of the project’s structure and enclosure that demonstrates a minimum of 10% reduction, compared with a baseline building, in at least three of the six impact categories listed below, one of which must be global warming potential (3 points).
Path 4: Meet requirements of Path 3 and incorporate building reuse and/or salvage materials into the project’s structure and enclosure for the proposed design. Demonstrate reductions compared with a baseline building of at least 20% reduction for global warming potential and demonstrate at least 10% reduction in two additional impact categories listed below (4 points).
For Paths 2, 3 and 4 listed above, no impact category assessed as part of the life-cycle assessment may increase by more than 5% compared with the baseline building. Include a narrative of how the life cycle assessment was conducted and if applicable for paths 2, 3 and 4 what changes were made to proposed buildings in order to achieve the related impact reductions.
The baseline and proposed buildings must be of comparable size, function, orientation, and operating energy performance as defined in EA Prerequisite Minimum Energy Performance. The service life of the baseline and proposed buildings must be the same and at least 60 years to fully account for maintenance and replacement. Use the same life-cycle assessment software tools and data sets to evaluate both the baseline building and the proposed building, and report all listed impact categories. Data sets must be compliant with ISO 14044.
Select at least three of the following impact categories for reduction:
 global warming potential (greenhouse gases), in kg CO2e;
 depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer, in kg CFC-11e;
 acidification of land and water sources, in moles H+ or kg SO2e;
 eutrophication, in kg nitrogen eq or kg phosphate eq;
 formation of tropospheric ozone, in kg NOx, kg O3 eq, or kg ethene; and
 depletion of nonrenewable energy resources, in MJ using CML / depletion of fossil fuels in TRACI.

MR-2.1
To encourage the use of products and materials for which life-cycle information is available and that have environmentally, economically, and socially preferable life-cycle impacts. To reward project teams for selecting products from manufacturers who have verified improved environmental life-cycle impacts.
Achieve one or more of the options below, for a maximum of 2 points.
Option 1. Environmental Product Declaration (EPD) (1 point)
Use at least 20 different permanently installed products sourced from at least five different manufacturers that meet one of the disclosure criteria below. (10 different permanently installed products from three different manufacturers for CS and Warehouses & Distribution Centers).
 Life-cycle assessment and environmental product declarations.
o Products with a publicly available, critically reviewed life-cycle assessment conforming to ISO 14044 that have at least a cradle to gate scope are valued as one whole product for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
o Product-specific Type III EPD -- Internally Reviewed. Products with an internally critically reviewed LCA in accordance with ISO 14071. Products with product-specific internal EPDs which conform to ISO 14025, and EN 15804 or ISO 21930 and have at least a cradle to gate scope are valued as one whole product for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
o Industry-wide Type III EPD -- Products with third-party certification (Type III), including external verification, in which the manufacturer is explicitly recognized as a participant by the program operator. Products with industry-wide EPDs, which conform to ISO 14025, and EN 15804 or ISO 21930 and have at least a cradle to gate scope are valued as one whole product for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 Environmental Product Declarations which conform to ISO 14025 and EN 15804 or ISO 21930 and have at least a cradle to gate scope.
o Product-specific Type III EPD -- Products with third-party certification (Type III), including external verification and external critical review in which the manufacturer is explicitly recognized as the participant by the program operator are valued as 1.5 products for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 USGBC approved program – Products that comply with other USGBC approved environmental product declaration frameworks.
Option 2. Multi-Attribute Optimization (1 point)
Use products that comply with one of the criteria below for 10%, by cost, of the total value of permanently installed products in the project, or use at least 10 permanently installed products sourced from at least three different manufacturers. Products will be valued as below.
Life Cycle Impact Reduction Action Plan (value at 50% by cost or ½ product)
The manufacturer has produced a product specific LCA using EN 15804 or ISO 21930 for the product and has provided a publicly available action plan to mitigate or reduce life cycle impacts. The action plan must be product-specific using the specified PCR functional unit, be critically reviewed, and must include the following information: o Description of the LCA conducted including the dataset, software or platform used by manufacturer to complete the analysis. o Identification of the largest life cycle impact areas identified in the analysis and a narrative description of the impact areas targeted for reduction in the action plan. o Description of specific steps anticipated in implementation of the action plan. Include proposed changes in formulation or manufacturing processes that are planned as part of impact reduction strategy. o Specific dates and a full timeline for completion of all the steps described in the action plan.
Life Cycle Impact Reductions in Embodied Carbon.
Products that have demonstrated environmental impact reductions for the specified functional unit based on a current third-party EPD or verified LCA that conforms to the comparability requirements of ISO 14025 and ISO 21930.
• The comparative analysis must show impact reduction in the global warming potential (GWP) impact category and must include a narrative describing how reductions in impacts were achieved. The published comparisons must be third-party verified (value at 100% by cost or 1 product).
• The comparative analysis must show impact reduction(s) of at least 10% in the global warming potential (GWP) impact category and must include a narrative describing how the impact reductions were achieved. The published comparisons must be third-party verified (value at 150% by cost or 1.5 products).
• The comparative analysis must show impact reduction(s) of at least 20% in the global warming potential (GWP) impact category, and demonstrate at least 5% reduction in two additional impact categories. A narrative describing how the impact reductions were achieved is required. The published comparisons must be third-party verified (value at 200% by cost or 2 products).
Impact categories:
o global warming potential (greenhouse gases), in CO2e;
o depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer, in kg CFC-11e;
o acidification of land and water sources, in moles H+ or kg SO2e;
o eutrophication, in kg nitrogen equivalent or kg phosphate equivalent;
o formation of tropospheric ozone, in kg NOx, kg O3 eq, or kg ethene; and
o depletion of nonrenewable energy resources, in MJ using CML / depletion of fossil fuels in TRACI.
USGBC approved program -- Products that comply with other USGBC approved multi-attribute frameworks.
For credit achievement calculation, products sourced (extracted, manufactured, purchased) within 100 miles (160 km) of the project site are valued at twice their base contributing cost (or number of products), up to a maximum of 200% of cost or 2 products.

MR-2.2
To encourage the use of products and materials for which life cycle information is available and that have environmentally, economically, and socially preferable life cycle impacts. To reward project teams for selecting products verified to have been extracted or sourced in a responsible manner.
Responsible Sourcing of Raw Materials (1-2 points)
Use products sourced from at least three different manufacturers that meet at least one of the responsible sourcing and extraction criteria below for at least 20%, by cost, of the total value of permanently installed building products in the project (1 point).
Use products sourced from at least five different manufacturers that meet at least one of the responsible sourcing and extraction criteria below for at least 40%, by cost, of the total value of permanently installed building products in the project (2 points).
 Extended producer responsibility. Products purchased from a manufacturer (producer) that participates in an extended producer responsibility program or is directly responsible for extended producer responsibility. Products meeting extended producer responsibility criteria are valued at 50% of their cost for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 Bio-based materials. Bio-based raw materials other than wood must be tested using ASTM Test Method D6866 and be legally harvested, as defined by the exporting and receiving country. Exclude hide products, such as leather and other animal skin material. o Bio-based products that meet the criteria above: value at 50% of cost multiplied by the biobased content of the product for the purposes of credit achievement calculation. o Bio-based products that meet the Sustainable Agriculture Network’s Sustainable Agriculture Standard: value at 100% of cost multiplied by the biobased content of the product for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 Wood products. Wood products must be certified by the Forest Stewardship Council or USGBC-approved equivalent. Products meeting wood products criteria are valued at 100% of their cost for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 Materials reuse. Reuse includes salvaged, refurbished, or reused products. Products meeting materials reuse criteria are valued at 200% of their cost for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
 Recycled content. Products meeting recycled content criteria are valued at 100% of their cost for the purposes of credit achievement calculation.
o Recycled content is the sum of postconsumer recycled content plus one-half the preconsumer recycled content, based on weight.
o The recycled fraction of the assembly is then multiplied by the cost of assembly to determine the recycled content value.
 USGBC approved program. Other USGBC approved programs meeting responsible sourcing and extraction criteria.
For credit achievement calculation, products sourced (extracted, manufactured and purchased) within 100 miles (160 km) of the project site are valued at twice their base contributing cost, up to a maximum of 200% of cost or 2 products.

MR-2.3
To encourage the use of products and materials for which life-cycle information is available and that have environmentally, economically, and socially preferable life-cycle impacts. To reward project teams for selecting products for which the chemical ingredients in the product are inventoried using an accepted methodology and for selecting products verified to minimize the use and generation of harmful substances. To reward raw material manufacturers who produce products verified to have improved life-cycle impacts.
Option 1. Material Ingredient Reporting (1 point)
Use at least 20 different permanently installed products from at least five different manufacturers that use any of the following programs to demonstrate the chemical inventory of the product to at least 0.1% (1000 ppm). (10 different permanently installed products from at least three different manufacturers for CS and Warehouses & Distribution Centers)
 Manufacturer Inventory. The manufacturer has published complete content inventory for the product following these guidelines:
o A publicly available inventory of all ingredients identified by name and Chemical Abstract Service Registration Number (CASRN) and/or European Community Number (EC Number).
o Materials defined as trade secret or intellectual property may withhold the name and/or CASRN/EC Number but must disclose ingredient/chemical role, amount and hazard score/class using either:
 Greenscreen List Translator (LT) score and/or Full GreenScreen Benchmark (BM)
 The Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of Chemicals rev.6 (2015) (GHS)
 The hazard screen must be applied to each trade secret ingredient and the inventory lists the hazard category for each of the health hazards included in Part 3 of GHS (e.g. “GHS Category 2 Carcinogen”).
 Health Product Declaration. The end use product has a published and complete Health Product Declaration with full disclosure of known hazards in compliance with the Health Product Declaration open Standard.
 Cradle to Cradle. Product has Material Health Certificate or is Cradle to Cradle Certified™ under standard version 3 or later with a Material Health achievement level at the Bronze level or higher.
 Declare. The Declare product label must meet the following requirements:
o Declare labels designated as Red List Free or Declared.
o Declare labels designated as LBC Compliant that demonstrate content inventory to 0.1% (1000 ppm).
 ANSI/BIFMA e3 Furniture Sustainability Standard. The documentation from the assessor or scorecard from BIFMA must demonstrate the product earned at least 3 points under 7.5.1.3 Advanced Level in e3-2014 or 3 points under 7.4.1.3 Advanced Level in e3-2012.
 Product Lens Certification
 Facts – NSF/ANSI 336: Sustainability Assessment for Commercial Furnishings Fabric at any certification level.
 USGBC approved program. Other USGBC approved programs meeting the material ingredient reporting criteria.
Any compliant reports above with third-party verification that includes the verification of content inventory are worth 1.5 products for credit achievement calculations.
AND/OR
Option 2: Material Ingredient Optimization (1 point)
Use permanently installed products from at least three different manufacturers that document their material ingredient optimization using the paths below. Choose either 10 compliant products, or select products that constitute at least 10%, by cost, of the total value of permanently installed products in the project.
Material Ingredient Screening and Optimization Action Plan (value at 50% by cost or ½ product)  The manufacturer has screened the product to at least 1,000 ppm and has provided a publicly available inventory meeting the requirements of Option 1 and completed a detailed action plan to mitigate or reduce known hazards using the principles of green chemistry. The action plan must be product-specific (not company, manufacturer or brand), and must include the following information: o Description of the screening or assessment platform used by manufacturer to complete the material ingredient screening and analysis. o Identification of the specific green chemistry principles targeted for implementation in the action plan. o Description of specific steps anticipated in implementation of the action plan. Include proposed changes in formulation or manufacturing processes that are planned as part of green chemistry optimization strategy. o Specific dates and a full timeline for completion of all the steps described in the action plan. Advanced Inventory & Assessment (value at 100% by cost or 1 product):
 The end use product meets the requirements of any of the following: o Manufacturer Inventory or Health Product Declaration: The product has demonstrated a chemical inventory to at least 0.01% by weight (100 ppm) with no GreenScreen LT-1 hazards or GHS Category 1 hazards. The HPD or Manufacturer Inventory must be third party verified. o Manufacturer Inventory or HPD: The product has demonstrated a chemical inventory to at least 0.01% by weight (100ppm) and at least 75% by weight of product is assessed using GreenScreen Benchmark assessment. The remaining 25% by weight of product has been inventoried. The GreenScreen assessment must be publicly available. The HPD or Manufacturer Inventory must be third-party verified.
o Declare labels designated as Red List Free that are third-party verified.
o Cradle to Cradle. Product has Material Health Certificate or is Cradle to Cradle Certified™ under standard version 3 or later with a Material Health achievement level at the Silver level or higher. Material Ingredient Optimization (value at 150% by cost or 1.5 products)  The end use product has demonstrated a product inventory and assessment of ingredients using any of the following programs: o Manufacturer Inventory or HPD: The product has demonstrated a chemical inventory to at least 0.01% by weight (100ppm) and at least 95% by weight of product is assessed using GreenScreen Benchmark assessment. No Benchmark 1 hazards (BM-1) are present in the end use product. The remaining 5% by weight of product not assessed has been inventoried and screened using GreenScreen List Translator and no GreenScreen LT-1 hazards are present in the end use product. The documents must be third party verified. o Cradle to Cradle v3 certified product with Material Health category score of Silver or higher, or a Cradle to Cradle certified Material Health Certificate at Silver level or higher.
International Alternative Compliance Path – REACH Optimization (value at 100% of cost or 1 product).
 End use products and materials have fully inventoried chemical ingredients to 100 ppm and assess each substance against the Authorization List – Annex XIV, the Restriction list – Annex XVII and the SVHC candidate list, (the version in effect June 2013,) proving that no such substance is included in the product. If the product contains no ingredients listed on the REACH Authorization, Restriction, and Candidate list.
USGBC approved program.
 Products that comply with USGBC approved building product optimization criteria for material ingredient optimization and/or advanced inventory & assessment pathways.
For credit achievement calculation, products sourced (extracted, manufactured, purchased) within 100 miles (160 km) of the project site are valued at twice their base contributing cost (or number of products), up to a maximum of 200% of cost or 2 products.

MR-3
To reduce construction and demolition waste disposed of in landfills and incineration facilities by recovering, reusing, and recycling materials.
Recycle and/or salvage nonhazardous construction and demolition materials. Calculations can be by weight or volume but must be consistent throughout.
Exclude excavated soil, land-clearing debris from calculations. Include materials destined for alternative daily cover (ADC) in the calculations as waste (not diversion). Include wood waste converted to fuel (biofuel) in the calculations; other types of waste-to-energy are not considered diversion for this credit.
However, for international projects that cannot meet credit requirements using reuse and recycling methods, waste-to-energy systems may be considered waste diversion if the European Commission Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC and Waste Incineration Directive 2000/76/EC are followed and Waste to Energy facilities meet applicable European Committee for Standardization (CEN) EN 303 standards.
Option 1. Diversion (1–2 points)
Path 1a. Divert 50% and Three Material Streams (1 point)
Divert at least 50% of the total construction and demolition material; diverted materials must include at least three material streams.
OR
Path 1b. Divert 50% using Certified Commingled Recycling Facility and One More Material Stream (1 Point)
Divert at least 50% of the total construction and demolition material; diverted materials must include at least two material streams. All commingled recycling is required to be one of the streams and must be sent to offsite sorting facility(ies) certified by the Recycling Certification Institute or approved equivalent.
OR
Path 2a. Divert 75% and Four Material Streams (2 points)
Divert at least 75% of the total construction and demolition material; diverted materials must include at least four material streams.
OR
Path 2b. Divert 75% using Certified Commingled Recycling Facility and Two More Material Streams (2 points)
Divert at least 75% of the total construction and demolition material; diverted materials must include at least three material streams. All commingled recycling is required to be one of the streams and must be sent to offsite sorting facility(ies) certified by the Recycling Certification Institute or approved equivalent.
OR
Option 2. Reduction of Total (Construction and Demolition) Waste Material (2 points)
Salvage or recycle renovation and demolition debris and utilize onsite waste minimizing design strategies for new construction activities. Achieve the waste generation thresholds in Table 1 and create a narrative describing how a project is addressing waste prevention and/or achieving waste generation thresholds via design strategies.
Do not generate more than 7.5 pounds of construction waste per square foot (36.6 kilograms of waste per square meter) of the building’s floor area for all BD&C projects except warehouses.
Table 1: Thresholds of compliance for reduction of total waste material
Type of Waste
Building Type
Total Waste Reduction Requirements
Points Available
Renovation and Demolition Waste
All
Salvage or recycle at least 75%, not including ADC
Required
New Construction Waste
All except warehouses
Reduce waste generation to less than 7.5 lbs/sf
2
New Construction Waste
Warehouse projects
Reduce waste generation to less than 2.5 lbs/sf

EQ-1
To promote occupants’ comfort, well-being, and productivity by improving indoor air quality.
Option 1. Enhanced IAQ Strategies (1 point)
Comply with all of the following requirements, as applicable.
Mechanically ventilated spaces:
A. entryway systems;
B. interior cross-contamination prevention; and
C. filtration.
Naturally ventilated spaces:
A. entryway systems; and
D. natural ventilation design calculations.
Mixed-mode systems:
A. entryway systems;
B. interior cross-contamination prevention;
C. filtration;
D. natural ventilation design calculations; and
E. mixed-mode design calculations.
A. Entryway Systems
Install permanent entryway systems at least 10 feet (3 meters) long in the primary direction of travel to capture dirt and particulates entering the building at regularly used exterior entrances. Acceptable entryway systems include permanently installed grates, grilles, slotted systems that allow for cleaning underneath, rollout mats, and any other materials manufactured as entryway systems with equivalent or better performance. Maintain all on a weekly basis.
Warehouses & Distribution Centers only
Entryway systems are not required at doors leading from the exterior to the loading dock or garage but must be installed between these spaces and adjacent office areas.
B. Interior Cross-Contamination Prevention
Sufficiently exhaust each space where hazardous gases or chemicals may be present or used (e.g., garages, housekeeping and laundry areas, copying and printing rooms), using the exhaust rates determined in EQ Prerequisite Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance or a minimum of 0.50 cfm per square foot (2.54 l/s per square meter), to create negative pressure with respect to adjacent spaces when the doors to the room are closed. For each of these spaces, provide self-closing doors and deck-to-deck partitions or a hard-lid ceiling.
C. Filtration
Each ventilation system that supplies outdoor air to occupied spaces must have particle filters or air-cleaning devices that meet one of the following filtration media requirements:
 minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) of 13 or higher, in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 52.2–2017; or
 Equivalent filtration media class of ePM1 50% or higher, as defined by ISO 16890-2016, Particulate Air Filters for General Ventilation, Determination of the Filtration Performance.
Replace all air filtration media after completion of construction and before occupancy.
Natural Ventilation Design Calculations
Demonstrate that the system design for occupied spaces employs the appropriate strategies in Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) Applications Manual AM10, March 2005, Natural Ventilation in Non-Domestic Buildings, Section 2.4.
E. Mixed-Mode Design Calculations
Demonstrate that the system design for occupied spaces complies with CIBSE Applications Manual 13–2000, Mixed Mode Ventilation.
Option 2. Additional Enhanced IAQ Strategies (1 point)
Comply with one of the following requirements
Mechanically ventilated spaces (select one):
A. exterior contamination prevention;
B. increased ventilation;
C. carbon dioxide monitoring; or
D. additional source control and monitoring.
Naturally ventilated spaces (select one):
A. exterior contamination prevention;
D. additional source control and monitoring; or
E. natural ventilation room by room calculations.
Mixed-mode systems (select one):
A. exterior contamination prevention;
B. increased ventilation;
D. additional source control and monitoring; or
E. natural ventilation room-by-room calculations.
A. Exterior Contamination Prevention
Design the project to minimize and control the entry of pollutants into the building. Ensure through the results of computational fluid dynamics modeling, Gaussian dispersion analyses, wind tunnel modeling, or tracer gas modeling that outdoor air contaminant concentrations at outdoor air intakes are below the thresholds listed in Table 1 (or local equivalent for projects outside the U.S., whichever is more stringent).
Table 1. Maximum concentrations of pollutants at outdoor air intakes
Pollutants Maximum concentration Standard Those regulated by National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) Allowable annual average OR 8-hour or 24-hour average where an annual standard does not exist OR Rolling 3-month average National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)
B. Increased Ventilation
Increase breathing zone outdoor air ventilation rates to all occupied spaces by at least 30% above the minimum rates as determined in EQ Prerequisite Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance.
C. Carbon Dioxide Monitoring
Monitor CO2 concentrations within all densely occupied spaces. CO2 monitors must be between 3 and 6 feet (900 and 1 800 millimeters) above the floor. CO2 monitors must have an audible or visual indicator or alert the building automation system if the sensed CO2 concentration exceeds the setpoint by more than 10%. Calculate appropriate CO2 setpoints using methods in ASHRAE 62.1–2016, Appendix D.
D. Additional Source Control and Monitoring
For spaces where air contaminants are likely, evaluate potential sources of additional air contaminants besides CO2. Develop and implement a materials-handling plan to reduce the likelihood of contaminant release. Install monitoring systems with sensors designed to detect the specific contaminants. An alarm must indicate any unusual or unsafe conditions.
E. Natural Ventilation Room-by-Room Calculations
Follow CIBSE AM10, Section 4, Design Calculations, to predict that room-by-room airflows will provide effective natural ventilation.

EQ-2
To reduce concentrations of chemical contaminants that can damage air quality, human health, productivity, and the environment.
Use materials on the building interior (everything within the waterproofing membrane) that meet the low-emitting criteria below. Points are awarded according to Table 1:
Table 1. Points for low-emitting materials
2 product categories
1 point
3 product categories
2 points
4 product categories
3 points
5 product categories
3 points + exemplary performance
Reach 90% threshold in at least three product categories
Exemplary performance or 1 additional point if only 1 or 2 points achieved above.
Paints and Coatings
At least 75% of all paints and coatings, by volume or surface area, meet the VOC emissions evaluation AND 100% meet the VOC content evaluation.
The paints and coatings product category includes all interior paints and coatings applied on site.
Adhesives and Sealants
At least 75% of all adhesives and sealants, by volume or surface area, meet the VOC emissions evaluation AND 100% meet the VOC content evaluation.
The adhesives and sealants product category includes all interior adhesives and sealants applied on site.
Flooring
At least 90% of all flooring, by cost or surface area, meets the VOC emissions evaluation OR inherently nonemitting sources criteria, OR salvaged and reused materials criteria.
The flooring product category includes all types of hard and soft surface flooring (carpet, ceramic, vinyl, rubber, engineered, solid wood, laminates), wall base, underlayments, and other floor coverings.
Subflooring is excluded.
Wall panels
At least 75% of all wall panels, by cost or surface area, meet the VOC emissions evaluation, OR inherently nonemitting sources criteria, OR salvaged and reused materials criteria.
The wall panels product category includes all finish wall treatments (wall coverings, wall paneling, wall tile), surface wall structures such as gypsum or plaster, cubicle/curtain/partition walls, trim, doors, frames, windows, and window treatments.
Removable/interchangeable fabric panels, built-in cabinetry, and vertical structural elements are excluded.
Ceilings
At least 90% of all ceilings, by cost or surface area, meet the VOC emissions evaluation, OR inherently nonemitting sources criteria, OR salvaged and reused materials criteria.
The ceilings product category includes all ceiling panels, ceiling tile, surface ceiling structures such as gypsum or plaster, suspended systems (including canopies and clouds), and glazed skylights.
Overhead structural elements (exposed, finished, and unfinished) are excluded.
Insulation
At least 75% of all insulation, meets the VOC emissions evaluation.
The insulation material category includes all thermal and acoustic boards, batts, rolls, blankets, sound attention fire blankets, foamed-in place, loose-fill, blown, and sprayed insulation.
Insulation for HVAC ducts and plumbing piping are excluded.
Furniture
At least 75% of all furniture in the project scope of work, by cost, meets the VOC emissions evaluation, OR inherently nonemitting sources criteria, OR salvaged and reused materials criteria.
The furniture product category includes all stand-alone furniture items purchased for the project.
Composite Wood
At least 75% of all composite wood, by cost or surface area, meets the Formaldehyde emissions evaluation OR salvaged and reused materials criteria.
The composite wood product category includes all particleboard, medium density fiberboard, hardwood veneer plywood, and structural composite wood not included in the flooring, ceiling, wall panels, or furniture material categories.
Low-emitting criteria
Inherently nonemitting sources
Product is an inherently nonemitting source of VOCs (stone, ceramic, powder-coated metals, plated or anodized metal, glass, concrete, clay brick, and unfinished or untreated solid wood) and has no integral organic-based surface coatings, binders, or sealants.
Salvaged and reused materials
Product is more than one year old at the time of use. If finishes are applied to the product on-site, the finishes must meet the VOC emissions evaluation AND VOC content evaluation requirements.
VOC emissions evaluation
Option 1. Product has been tested according to California Department of Public Health (CDPH) Standard Method v1.2–2017 and complies with the VOC limits in Table 4-1 of the method. Additionally, the range of total VOCs after 14 days (336 hours) was measured as specified in the CDPH Standard Method v1.2 and is reported (TVOC ranges: 0.5 mg/m3 or less, between 0.5 and 5 mg/m3, or 5 mg/m3 or more). Laboratories that conduct the tests must be accredited under ISO/IEC 17025 for the test methods they use. Products used in school classrooms must be evaluated using the classroom scenario, products used in other spaces must be evaluated using the default private office scenario
The statement of product compliance must include the exposure scenario(s) used, the amount of wet-applied product applied in mass per surface area (if applicable), the range of total VOCs, and follow guidelines in CDPH Standard Method v1.2-2017, Section 8. Organizations that certify manufacturers’ claims must be accredited under ISO Guide 17065.
Option 2. Product has been tested according to EN 16516:2017 and complies with the LCI values from Table 1 of the German AgBB Testing and Evaluation Scheme (2015) and a formaldehyde limit of 10 micrograms per cubic meter. Additionally, the range of total VOCs after 28 days was measured as specified in EN 16516 and reported (TVOC ranges: 0.5 mg/m3 or less, between 0.5 and 5 mg/m3, or 5 mg/m3 or more). Laboratories that conduct the tests must be accredited under ISO/IEC 17025 for the test methods they use.
The statement of product compliance must include the amount of wet-applied product applied in mass per surface area (if applicable) and the range of total VOCs. Organizations that certify manufacturers’ claims must be accredited under ISO Guide 17065.
VOC content evaluation
Product meets the VOC content limits outlined in one of the applicable standards and for projects in North America, methylene chloride and perchloroethylene may not be intentionally added.
Statement of product compliance must be made by the manufacturer. Any testing must follow the test method specified in the applicable regulation. If the applicable regulation requires subtraction of exempt compounds, any content of intentionally added exempt compounds larger than 1% weight by mass (total exempt compounds) must be disclosed.
Paints and coatings:
o California Air Resource Board (CARB) 2007 Suggested Control Measure (SCM) for Architectural Coatings
o South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Rule 1113, effective February 5, 2016
o European Decopaint Directive (2004/42/EC)
Hong Kong Air pollution control (VOC) Regulation for regulated architectural paints (January 2010)
 Adhesives and sealants:
o SCAQMD Rule 1168, October 6, 2017
o Canadian VOC Concentration Limits for Architectural Coatings (SOR/2009-264)
o Hong Kong Air Pollution Control (VOC) Regulation for regulated adhesives and regulated sealants (April 2012)
o Free of solvents, as defined in TRGS 610 (January 2011)
Formaldehyde Emissions Evaluation
Product meets one of the following:
 EPA TSCA Title VI or California Air Resources Board (CARB) ATCM for formaldehyde requirements for ultra-low-emitting formaldehyde (ULEF) resins or
 EPA TSCA Title VI or CARB ATCM formaldehyde requirements for no added formaldehyde resins (NAF).
 Tested per EN 717-1:2014 for formaldehyde emissions and complies with emissions class E1.Structural composite wood product made with moisture resistant adhesives meeting ASTM 2559, no surface treatments with added urea-formaldehyde resins or coatings, and certified according to one of the following industry standards:
o Plywood: compliant in accordance with Voluntary Product Standard ‐ Structural Plywood (PS 1‐09), Voluntary Product Standard – Performance Standard for Wood‐Based Structural‐Use Panels (PS 2‐10), or one of the standards considered by CARB to be equivalent to PS 1 or PS 2: (AS/NZS 2269, EN 636 3S (including CE label), Canadian Standards Association CSA O121 for Douglas fir plywood, CSA O151 for Canadian softwood plywood, for CSA O153 Poplar plywood, or CSAO325 for Construction sheathing)
o Oriented strand board: specified with the Exposure 1 or Exterior bond classification in accordance with Voluntary Product Standard – Performance Standard for Wood‐Based Structural‐Use Panels (PS 2‐10)
o Structural composite lumber: compliant in accordance with Standard Specification for Evaluation of Structural Composite Lumber Products (ASTM D 5456‐13)
o Glued laminated timber: compliant in accordance with Structural Glued Laminated Timber (ANSI A190.1‐2012)
o I‐joists compliant in accordance with Standard Specification for Establishing and Monitoring Structural Capacities of Prefabricated Wood I‐Joists (ASTM D 5055‐13)
o Cross‐laminated timber: compliant in accordance with Standard for Performance‐Rated Cross‐Laminated Timber (PRG 320‐15)
o Finger‐jointed lumber labeled “Heat Resistant Adhesive (HRA)” in accordance with the American Softwood Lumber Standard (DOC PS‐20 2015)
Furniture emissions evaluation
Product has been tested in accordance with ANSI/BIFMA Standard Method M7.1–2011 (R2016) and complies with ANSI/BIFMA e3-2014e Furniture Sustainability Standard, Sections 7.6.1 (for half credit, by cost) OR 7.6.2 (for full credit, by cost). If 75% of the furniture also complies with Section 7.6.3 in addition to 7.6.2, the category counts for exemplary level (90%). Laboratories that conduct the tests must be accredited under ISO/IEC 17025 for the test methods they use.
Seating products must be evaluated using the seating scenario. Classroom furniture must be evaluated using the standard school classroom scenario. Other products should be evaluated using the open plan or private office scenario, as appropriate. The open plan scenario is more stringent.
Statements of product compliance must include the exposure scenario(s). Organizations that certify manufacturers’ claims must be accredited under ISO Guide 17065.

EQ-3
To promote the well-being of construction workers and building occupants by minimizing indoor air quality problems associated with construction and renovation.
Develop and implement an indoor air quality (IAQ) management plan for the construction and preoccupancy phases of the building. The plan must address all of the following.
During construction, meet or exceed all applicable recommended control measures of the Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning National Contractors Association (SMACNA) IAQ Guidelines for Occupied Buildings under Construction, 2nd edition, 2007, ANSI/SMACNA 008–2008, Chapter 3.
Protect absorptive materials stored on-site and installed from moisture damage.
Do not operate permanently installed air-handling equipment during construction unless filtration media with a minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) of 8, as determined by ASHRAE 52.2–2017, with errata (or media with ISOcoarse 90% or higher, as defined by ISO 16890-2016, Particulate Air Filters for General Ventilation, Determination of the Filtration Performance ), are installed at each return air grille and return or transfer duct inlet opening such that there is no bypass around the filtration media. Immediately before occupancy, replace all filtration media with the final design filtration media, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Prohibit the use of smoking inside the building and within 25 feet (7.5 meters) of the building openings during construction. Smoking includes tobacco smoke, as well as smoke produced from the combustion of cannabis and controlled substances and the emissions produced by electronic smoking devices.

EQ-4
To establish better quality indoor air in the building after construction and during occupancy.
Select one of the following two options, to be implemented after construction ends and the building has been completely cleaned. All interior finishes, such as millwork, doors, paint, carpet, acoustic tiles, and movable furnishings (e.g., workstations, partitions), must be installed, and major VOC punch list items must be finished. The options cannot be combined.
Option 1. Flush-Out (1 point)
Path 1. Before Occupancy
Install new filtration media and perform a building flush-out by supplying a total air volume of 14,000 cubic feet of outdoor air per square foot (4 267 140 liters of outdoor air per square meter) of gross floor area while maintaining an internal temperature of at least 60°F (15°C) and no higher than 80F (27°C) and relative humidity no higher than 60%.
OR
Path 2. During Occupancy
If occupancy is desired before the flush-out is completed, the space may be occupied only after delivery of a minimum of 3,500 cubic feet of outdoor air per square foot (1 066 260 liters of outdoor air per square meter) of gross floor area while maintaining an internal temperature of at least 60°F (15°C) and no higher than 80F (27°C) and relative humidity no higher than 60%.
Once the space is occupied, it must be ventilated at a minimum rate of 0.30 cubic foot per minute (cfm) per square foot of outdoor air (1.5 liters per second per square meter of outside air) or the design minimum outdoor air rate determined in EQ Prerequisite Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance, whichever is greater. During each day of the flush-out period, ventilation must begin at least three hours before occupancy and continue during occupancy. These conditions must be maintained until a total of 14,000 cubic feet per square foot of outdoor air (4 270 liters of outdoor air per square meter) has been delivered to the space.
OR
Option 2. Air Testing (1-2 points)
After construction ends and before occupancy, but under ventilation conditions typical for occupancy, conduct baseline IAQ testing in occupied spaces for the contaminants listed in Path 1. Particulate matter
and inorganic gases (for 1 point) and/or Path 2. Volatile organic compounds (for 1 point). Retail projects may conduct the testing within 14 days of occupancy.
Path 1. Particulate Matter and Inorganic Gases (1 point)
Test for the particulate matter (PM) and inorganic gases listed in Table 1, using an allowed test method, and demonstrate the contaminants do not exceed the concentration limits listed in the table.
Table 1. Particulate Matter and inorganic gases Contaminant (CAS#) Concentration Limit (μg/m3) Allowed Test Methods
Carbon monoxide (CO)
9 ppm; no more than 2 ppm above outdoor levels
ISO 4224
EPA Compendium Method IP-3
GB/T 18883-2002 for projects in China
Direct calibrated electrochemical instrument with accuracy of (+/- 2% ppm <50 ppm minimum accuracy).
PM 10
ISO 14644-1:2015, cleanroom class of 8 or lower
50 μg/m3
Healthcare only: 20 μg/m3
Particulate monitoring device with accuracy greater of 5 micrograms/m3 or 20% of reading and resolution (5 min average data) +/- 5 μg/m3
PM 2.5
12 μg/m3 or 35 μg/m3**
Ozone
0.07 ppm
Monitoring device with accuracy greater of 5 ppb or 20% of reading and resolution (5 min average data) +/- 5 ppb
ISO 13964
ASTM D5149 -– 02
EPA designated methods for Ozone **Projects in areas with high ambient levels of PM2.5 (known EPA nonattainment areas for PM2.5, or local equivalent) must meet the 35 ug/m3 limit, all other projects should meet the 12 ug/m3 limit.
AND/OR
Path 2. Volatile Organic Compounds (1 point)
Perform a screening test for Total Volatile Organic Compounds (TVOC). Use ISO 16000-6, EPA TO-17, or EPA TO-15 to collect and analyze the air sample. Calculate the TVOC value per EN 16516:2017, CDPH Standard Method v1.2 2017 section 3.9.4, or alternative calculation method as long as full method description is included in test report. If the TVOC levels exceed 500 μg/m3, investigate for potential issues by comparing the individual VOC levels from the GC/MS results to associated cognizant authority health-based limits. Correct any identified issues and re-test if necessary.
Additionally, test for the individual volatile organic compounds listed in Table 2 using an allowed test method and demonstrate the contaminants do not exceed the concentration limits listed in the table. Laboratories that conduct the tests must be accredited under ISO/IEC 17025 for the test methods they use.
Exemplary performance is available for projects that test for the additional target volatile organic compounds specified in CDPH Standard Method v1.2-2017, Table 4-1 and do not exceed the full CREL levels for these compounds adopted by Cal/EPA OEHHA in effect on June 2016.
Table 2. Volatile organic compounds
Contaminant (CAS#) Concentration Limit (μg/m3) Allowed Test Methods
Formaldehyde 50-00-0
20 μg/m3 (16 ppb)
ISO 16000-3, 4;
EPA TO-11a,
EPA comp. IP-6A
ASTM D5197-16
Acetaldehyde 75-07-0
140 μg/m3
Benzene 71-43-2
3 μg/m3
ISO 16000-6
EPA IP-1,
EPA TO-17,
EPA TO-15
ISO 16017-1, 2;
ASTM D6196-15
Hexane (n-) 110-54-3
7000 μg/m3
Naphthalene 91-20-3
9 μg/m3
Phenol 108-95-2
200 μg/m3
Styrene 100-42-5
900 μg/m3
Tetrachloroethylene 127-18-4
35 μg/m3
Toluene 108-88-3
300 μg/m3
Vinyl acetate 108-05-4
200 μg/m3
Dichlorobenzene (1,4-) 106-46-7
800 μg/m3
Xylenes-total 108-38-3, 95-47-6, and 106-42-3
700 μg/m3

EQ-5
To promote occupants’ productivity, comfort, and well-being by providing quality thermal comfort.
Meet the requirements for both thermal comfort design and thermal comfort control.
Thermal Comfort Design
Option 1. ASHRAE Standard 55-2017
Design heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems and the building envelope to meet the requirements of ASHRAE Standard 55–2017, Thermal Comfort Conditions for Human Occupancy with errata or a local equivalent.
For natatoriums, demonstrate compliance with ASHRAE HVAC Applications Handbook, 2015 edition, Chapter 5, Places of Assembly, Typical Natatorium Design Conditions, with errata.
OR
Option 2. ISO Standards
Design HVAC systems and the building envelope to meet the requirements of the applicable standard:
 ISO 7730:2005, Ergonomics of the Thermal Environment, analytical determination and interpretation of thermal comfort, using calculation of the PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria; and
 ISO 17772-2017, Energy Performance of Buildings- Indoor environmental quality- Part 1. Indoor environmental input parameters for the design and assessment of energy performance of buildings Section A2.
Thermal Comfort Control
Provide individual thermal comfort controls for at least 50% of individual occupant spaces. Provide group thermal comfort controls for all shared multioccupant spaces.
Thermal comfort controls allow occupants, whether in individual spaces or shared multioccupant spaces, to adjust at least one of the following in their local environment: air temperature, radiant temperature, air speed, and humidity.

EQ-6
To promote occupants’ productivity, comfort, and well-being by providing high-quality lighting.
Select one or both of the following two options.
Option 1. Lighting Control (1 point)
For at least 90% of individual occupant spaces, provide individual lighting controls that enable occupants to adjust the lighting to suit their individual tasks and preferences, with at least three lighting levels or scenes (on, off, midlevel). Midlevel is 30% to 70% of the maximum illumination level (not including daylight contributions).
For all shared multioccupant spaces, meet all of the following requirements.
 Have in place multizone control systems that enable occupants to adjust the lighting to meet group needs and preferences, with at least three lighting levels or scenes (on, off, midlevel).
 Lighting for any presentation or projection wall must be separately controlled.
 Switches or manual controls must be located in the same space as the controlled luminaires. A person operating the controls must have a direct line of sight to the controlled luminaires.
Hospitality only
Guest rooms are assumed to provide adequate lighting controls and are therefore not included in the credit calculations.
AND/OR
Option 2. Lighting Quality (1 point)
Choose four of the following strategies.
A. For all regularly occupied spaces, use light fixtures with a luminance of less than 2,500 cd/m2 between 45 and 90 degrees from nadir.
Exceptions include wallwash fixtures properly aimed at walls, as specified by manufacturer’s data, indirect uplighting fixtures, provided there is no view down into these uplights from a regularly occupied space above, and any other specific applications (i.e. adjustable fixtures).
B. For the entire project, use light sources with a CRI of 80 or higher. Exceptions include lamps or fixtures specifically designed to provide colored lighting for effect, site lighting, or other special use.
C. For at least 75% of the total connected lighting load, use light sources that have a rated life (or L70 for LED sources) of at least 24,000 hours (at 3-hour per start, if applicable).
D. Use direct-only overhead lighting for 25% or less of the total connected lighting load for all regularly occupied spaces.
E. For at least 90% of the regularly occupied floor area, meet or exceed the following thresholds for area-weighted average surface reflectance: 85% for ceilings, 60% for walls, and 25% for floors.
F. If furniture is included in the scope of work, select furniture finishes to meet or exceed the following thresholds for area-weighted average surface reflectance: 45% for work surfaces, and 50% for movable partitions.
G. For at least 75% of the regularly occupied floor area, meet a ratio of average wall surface illuminance (excluding fenestration) to average work plane (or surface, if defined) illuminance that does not exceed 1:10. Must also meet strategy E, strategy F, or demonstrate area-weighted surface reflectance of at least 60% for walls.
H. For at least 75% of the regularly occupied floor area, meet a ratio of average ceiling illuminance (excluding fenestration) to work surface illuminance that does not exceed 1:10. Must also meet strategy E, strategy F, or demonstrate area-weighted surface reflectance of at least 85% for ceilings.

EQ-7
To connect building occupants with the outdoors, reinforce circadian rhythms, and reduce the use of electrical lighting by introducing daylight into the space.
Provide manual or automatic (with manual override) glare-control devices for all regularly occupied spaces.
AND
Select one of the following three options.
Option 1. Simulation: Spatial Daylight Autonomy and Annual Sunlight Exposure (1–3 points, 1-2 points Healthcare)
Perform annual computer simulations for spatial daylight autonomy300/50% (sDA300/50%), and annual sunlight exposure1000,250 (ASE1000,250) as defined in IES LM-83-12 for each regularly occupied space. Healthcare projects must use each regularly occupied space located in the perimeter area determined under EQ Credit Quality Views. Additionally, calculate the average sDA300/50% value for the total regularly occupied floor area.
For any regularly occupied spaces with ASE1000,250 greater than 10%, identify how the space is designed to address glare.
Points are awarded according to Table 1.
Table 1. Points for Option 1
New Construction, Core and Shell, Schools, Retail, Data Centers, Warehouses and Distribution Centers, Hospitality
HealthcareThe average sDA300/50% value for the regularly occupied floor area is at least 40%
1 point
1 point
The average sDA300/50% value for the regularly occupied floor area is at least 55%
2 points
2 points
The average sDA300/50% value for the regularly occupied floor area is at least 75%
3 points
Exemplary performance
Each regularly occupied space achieves sDA300/50% value of at least 55%
Exemplary performance or 1 additional point if only 1 or 2 points achieved above.
Exemplary performance or 1 additional point if only 1 point achieved above.
The sDA and ASE calculation grids should be no more than 2 feet (600 millimeters) square and laid out across the regularly occupied area at a work plane height of 30 inches (76 millimeters) above finished floor (unless otherwise defined). Use an hourly time-step analysis based on typical meteorological year data, or an equivalent, for the nearest available weather station. Include any permanent interior obstructions. Moveable furniture and partitions may be excluded.
OR
Option 2. Simulation: Illuminance Calculations (1–3 points, 1-2 points Healthcare)
Perform computer simulations for illuminance at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. on a clear-sky day at the equinox for each regularly occupied space. Healthcare projects should use the regularly occupied spaces located in the perimeter area determined under EQ Credit Quality Views.
Demonstrate illuminance levels are between 300 lux and 3,000 lux at both 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. Spaces with view-preserving automatic (with manual override) glare-control devices may demonstrate compliance for only the minimum 300 lux illuminance level.
Points are awarded according to Table 2.
Table 2. Points for Option 2 New Construction, Core and Shell, Schools, Retail, Data Centers, Warehouses and Distribution Centers, Hospitality Healthcare Percentage of regularly occupied floor area Points Percentage of regularly occupied floor area within perimeter area Points
55%
1
55%
1
75%
2
75%
2
90%
3
90%
Exemplary performance
Calculate illuminance intensity for sun (direct component) and sky (diffuse component) for clear-sky conditions as follows:
 Use typical meteorological year data, or an equivalent, for the nearest available weather station.
 Select one day within 15 days of September 21 and one day within 15 days of March 21 that represent the clearest sky condition.
 Use the average of the hourly value for the two selected days.
Exclude blinds or shades from the model. Include any permanent interior obstructions. Moveable furniture and partitions may be excluded.
OR
Option 3. Measurement (1-3 points, 1-2 points Healthcare)
Measure illuminance in each regularly occupied space. Healthcare projects should use the regularly occupied spaces located in the perimeter area determined under EQ Credit Quality Views.
Achieve illuminance levels between 300 lux and 3,000 lux. Spaces with view-preserving automatic (with manual override) glare-control devices may demonstrate compliance for only the minimum 300 lux illuminance level.
Points are awarded according to Table 3.
Table 3. Points for Option 3 New Construction, Core and Schools, Schools, Retail, Data Centers, Warehouses and Distribution Centers, Hospitality Healthcare Percentage of regularly occupied floor area Points Percentage of regularly occupied floor area within perimeter area
55% at one time in the year
1
55% at one time in the year
1
75% at two times in the year
2
75% at two times in the year
2
90% at two times in the year
3
90% at two times in the year
exemplary performance
With furniture, fixtures, and equipment in place, measure illuminance levels as follows:
 Measure at appropriate work plane height during any hour between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m.
 If pursuing one point, take one measurement in any regularly occupied month. If pursuing two points, take two measurements: one measurement in any regularly occupied month, and take a second as indicated in Table 4.
 For spaces larger than 150 square feet (14 square meters), take measurements on a maximum 10 foot (3 meter) square grid.
 For spaces 150 square feet (14 square meters) or smaller, take measurements on a maximum 3 foot (900 millimeters) square grid.
Table 4. Timing of measurements for illuminance If first measurement is taken in … take second measurement in …
January
May-September
February
June-October
March
June-July, November-December
April
August-December
May
September-January
June
October-February
July
November-March
August
December-April
September
December-January, May-June
October
February-June
November
March-July
December
April-August

EQ-8
To give building occupants a connection to the natural outdoor environment by providing quality views.
Achieve a direct line of sight to the outdoors via vision glazing for 75% of all regularly occupied floor area.
View glazing in the contributing area must provide a clear image of the exterior, not obstructed by frits, fibers, patterned glazing, or added tints that distort color balance.
Additionally, 75% of all regularly occupied floor area must have at least two of the following four kinds of views:
 multiple lines of sight to vision glazing in different directions at least 90 degrees apart;
 views that include at least two of the following: (1) flora, fauna, or sky; (2) movement; and (3) objects at least 25 feet (7.5 meters) from the exterior of the glazing;
 unobstructed views located within the distance of three times the head height of the vision glazing; and
 views with a view factor of 3 or greater, as defined in “Windows and Offices; A Study of Office Worker Performance and the Indoor Environment.”
Include in the calculations any permanent interior obstructions. Movable furniture and partitions may be excluded.
Views into interior atria may be used to meet up to 30% of the required area.

EQ-9
To provide workspaces and classrooms that promote occupants’ well-being, productivity, and communications through effective acoustic design.
For all occupied spaces, meet two of the following: HVAC background noise, Sound Transmission, and/or Reverberation time. Meet all three for an exemplary performance point.
Confirm compliance via calculations or measurements in representative rooms, and/or design documentation from a person experienced in the field of acoustics.
HVAC Background Noise
Achieve maximum background noise levels from heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems per 2015 ASHRAE Handbook-- HVAC Applications, Chapter 48, Table 1 ; AHRI Standard 885-2008, Table 15; or a local equivalent.
If confirming compliance via measurements, use a sound level meter that conforms to ANSI S1.4 for type 1 (precision) or type 2 (general purpose) sound measurement instrumentation, the International Electrotechnical Commission (2013) IEC 61672-1:2013 Electroacoustics – Sound Level Meters – Part 1: Specifications, or a local equivalent.
Comply with design criteria for HVAC noise levels resulting from the sound transmission paths listed in 2015 ASHRAE Handbook—HVAC Applications, Chapter 48, Table 6; or a local equivalent.
Sound Transmission
Categorize all occupied spaces by use and desired level of acoustic privacy.
Meet the composite sound transmission class (STCC) ratings or noise isolation class (NIC) listed in Table 1. For NIC measurements, use ASTM E336-17a or Annex A.3 of ANSI S12.60-2010.
Table 1. Minimum composite sound transmission class ratings or noise isolation class for adjacent spaces
Adjacency combinations
STC C **
NIC**
Retail
Retail
50
Collaborative / multi-use
Hallway, stairway
25
20
Private
Hallway, stairway
35
30
Confidential
Hallway, stairway
40
35
/ multi-use
Collaborative / multi-use
35
30
Collaborative / multi-use
Private
45
40
Collaborative / multi-use
Confidential
50
45
Private
Private
45
40
Private
Confidential
50
45
Confidential
Confidential
50
45
Conference room
Conference room
50
45
Mechanical equipment room*
Hallway, stairway
50
45
Mechanical equipment room*
Occupied area
60
55
*Minimum STCc or NIC has to be met unless proven that the equipment noise in conjunction with the sound isolation performance of the partitions and doors will not exceed the maximum background noise requirements of the adjacent space.
**If a sound masking system is implemented at a minimum level of 40 dBA, the STCc ratings or NIC values in Table 1 may be lowered by 5 points. This applies to all space types except mechanical equipment rooms. The sound masking system must be designed by an acoustical professional and meet the following criteria:
 The overall level for sound masking must be set by an acoustical professional and must not exceed 48 dBA in open offices, libraries, cafeterias, corridors/hallways, 45 dBA in enclosed offices, and 42 dBA in conference rooms, and wellness rooms. The combined level of masking and HVAC background noise must not exceed these limits.
 The system design and commissioning must provide overall level uniformity of +/-1 dBA and one-third octave band uniformity of +/-2 dB from at least 100 to 5,000 Hz when tested according to ASTM E1573-18
 The sound masking spectrum must conform to the National Research Council of Canada COPE Optimum Masking Spectrum or an alternate spectrum if specified by an acoustical engineer.
Reverberation Time
Meet the reverberation time requirements in Table 2 (adapted from Table 9.1 in the Performance Measurement Protocols for Commercial Buildings2).
Table 2. Reverberation time requirements
Room type
Application
T60 (sec), at 500 Hz, 1000 Hz, and 2000 Hz
Hotel/motel
Individual room or suite
< 0.6
Meeting or banquet room
< 0.8
Office building
Executive or private office
< 0.6
Conference room
< 0.6
Teleconference room
< 0.6
Open-plan office without sound masking
< 0.8
Open-plan office with sound masking
0.8
Courtroom
Unamplified speech
< 0.7
Amplified speech
< 1.0
Performing arts space
Drama theaters, concert and recital halls
Varies by application
Laboratories
Testing or research with minimal speech communication
< 1.0
Extensive phone use and speech communication
< 0.6
Church, mosque, synagogue
General assembly with critical music program
Varies by application
Library
< 1.0
Indoor stadium, gymnasium
Gymnasium and natatorium
< 2.0
Large-capacity space with speech amplification
< 1.5

IN-1
To encourage projects to achieve exceptional or innovative performance.
To achieve all five innovation points, a project team must achieve at least one pilot credit, at least one innovation credit and no more than two exemplary performance credits.
Option 1. Innovation (1 point)
Achieve significant, measurable environmental performance using a strategy not addressed in the LEED green building rating system.
Identify the following:
 the intent of the proposed innovation credit;
 proposed requirements for compliance;
 proposed submittals to demonstrate compliance; and
 the design approach or strategies used to meet the requirements.
Examples of innovation may be found in the LEED Innovation Catalog.
AND/OR
Option 2. Pilot (1 point)
Achieve one pilot credit from USGBC’s LEED Pilot Credit Library.
AND/OR
Option 3. Additional Strategies
 Innovation (1-3 points)
Defined in Option 1 above.
 Pilot (1-3 points)
Meet the requirements of Option 2.
Exemplary Performance (1–2 points)
Achieve exemplary performance in an existing LEED v4 prerequisite or credit that allows exemplary performance, as specified in the LEED Reference Guide, v4 edition. An exemplary performance point is typically earned for achieving double the credit requirements or the next incremental percentage threshold.

IN-2
To encourage the team integration required by a LEED project and to streamline the application and certification process.
At least one principal participant of the project team must be a LEED Accredited Professional (AP) with a specialty appropriate for the project.

RP-1
To provide an incentive for the achievement of credits that address geographically specific environmental, social equity, and public health priorities.
Earn up to four of the six Regional Priority credits. These credits have been identified by the USGBC regional councils and chapters as having additional regional importance for the project’s region. A database of Regional Priority credits and their geographic applicability is available on the USGBC website, http://www.usgbc.org.
One point is awarded for each Regional Priority credit achieved, up to a maximum of four.